<h2><a id="page-209"/><span class="pgnum">209</span>THE NATURE OF THE GODS.</h2>
<hr/>
<h3>BOOK I.</h3>
<p>I. <span class="first">There</span> are many things in philosophy, my dear Brutus, which are not as
yet fully explained to us, and particularly (as you very well know) that
most obscure and difficult question concerning the Nature of the Gods,
so extremely necessary both towards a knowledge of the human mind and
the practice of true religion: concerning which the opinions of men are
so various, and so different from each other, as to lead strongly to the
inference that ignorance<a id="FNA-72"/><a href="#FN-72" class="pginternal"><sup>72</sup></a> is the cause, or origin, of philosophy, and
that the Academic philosophers have been prudent in refusing their
assent to things uncertain: for what is more unbecoming to a wise man
than to judge rashly? or what rashness is so unworthy of the gravity and
stability of a philosopher as either to maintain false opinions, or,
without the least hesitation, to support and defend what he has not
thoroughly examined and does not clearly comprehend?</p>
<p>In the question now before us, the greater part of mankind have united
to acknowledge that which is most probable, and which we are all by
nature led to suppose, namely, that there are Gods. Protagoras<a id="FNA-73"/><a href="#FN-73" class="pginternal"><sup>73</sup></a>
doubted whether there were any. Diagoras the Melian and Theodorus of
Cyrene entirely believed there were no such beings. But they who have
affirmed that there are Gods, have expressed such a variety of
sentiments on the subject, and the disagreement between them is so
great, that it would be <a id="page-210"/><span class="pgnum">210</span>tiresome to enumerate their opinions; for they
give us many statements respecting the forms of the Gods, and their
places of abode, and the employment of their lives. And these are
matters on which the philosophers differ with the most exceeding
earnestness. But the most considerable part of the dispute is, whether
they are wholly inactive, totally unemployed, and free from all care and
administration of affairs; or, on the contrary, whether all things were
made and constituted by them from the beginning; and whether they will
continue to be actuated and governed by them to eternity. This is one of
the greatest points in debate; and unless this is decided, mankind must
necessarily remain in the greatest of errors, and ignorant of what is
most important to be known.</p>
<p>II. For there are some philosophers, both ancient and modern, who have
conceived that the Gods take not the least cognizance of human affairs.
But if their doctrine be true, of what avail is piety, sanctity, or
religion? for these are feelings and marks of devotion which are offered
to the Gods by men with uprightness and holiness, on the ground that men
are the objects of the attention of the Gods, and that many benefits are
conferred by the immortal Gods on the human race. But if the Gods have
neither the power nor the inclination to help us; if they take no care
of us, and pay no regard to our actions; and if there is no single
advantage which can possibly accrue to the life of man; then what reason
can we have to pay any adoration, or any honors, or to prefer any
prayers to them? Piety, like the other virtues, cannot have any
connection with vain show or dissimulation; and without piety, neither
sanctity nor religion can be supported; the total subversion of which
must be attended with great confusion and disturbance in life.</p>
<p>I do not even know, if we cast off piety towards the Gods, but that
faith, and all the associations of human life, and that most excellent
of all virtues, justice, may perish with it.</p>
<p>There are other philosophers, and those, too, very great and illustrious
men, who conceive the whole world to be directed and governed by the
will and wisdom of the Gods; nor do they stop here, but conceive
likewise that the Deities <a id="page-211"/><span class="pgnum">211</span>consult and provide for the preservation of
mankind. For they think that the fruits, and the produce of the earth,
and the seasons, and the variety of weather, and the change of climates,
by which all the productions of the earth are brought to maturity, are
designed by the immortal Gods for the use of man. They instance many
other things, which shall be related in these books; and which would
almost induce us to believe that the immortal Gods had made them all
expressly and solely for the benefit and advantage of men. Against these
opinions Carneades has advanced so much that what he has said should
excite a desire in men who are not naturally slothful to search after
truth; for there is no subject on which the learned as well as the
unlearned differ so strenuously as in this; and since their opinions are
so various, and so repugnant one to another, it is possible that none of
them may be, and absolutely impossible that more than one should be,
right.</p>
<p>III. Now, in a cause like this, I may be able to pacify well-meaning
opposers, and to confute invidious censurers, so as to induce the latter
to repent of their unreasonable contradiction, and the former to be glad
to learn; for they who admonish one in a friendly spirit should be
instructed, they who attack one like enemies should be repelled. But I
observe that the several books which I have lately published<a id="FNA-74"/><a href="#FN-74" class="pginternal"><sup>74</sup></a> have
occasioned much noise and various discourse about them; some people
wondering what the reason has been why I have applied myself so suddenly
to the study of philosophy, and others desirous of knowing what my
opinion is on such subjects. I likewise perceive that many people wonder
at my following that philosophy<a id="FNA-75"/><a href="#FN-75" class="pginternal"><sup>75</sup></a> chiefly which seems to take away the
light, and to bury and envelop things in a kind of artificial night, and
that I should so unexpectedly have taken up the defence of a school that
has been long neglected and forsaken. But it is a mistake to suppose
that this application to philosophical studies has been sudden on my
part. I have applied <a id="page-212"/><span class="pgnum">212</span>myself to them from my youth, at no small expense
of time and trouble; and I have been in the habit of philosophizing a
great deal when I least seemed to think about it; for the truth of which
I appeal to my orations, which are filled with quotations from
philosophers, and to my intimacy with those very learned men who
frequented my house and conversed daily with me, particularly Diodorus,
Philo, Antiochus, and Posidonius,<a id="FNA-76"/><a href="#FN-76" class="pginternal"><sup>76</sup></a> under whom I was bred; and if all
the precepts of philosophy are to have reference to the conduct of life,
I am inclined to think that I have advanced, both in public and private
affairs, only such principles as may be supported by reason and
authority.</p>
<p>IV. But if any one should ask what has induced me, in the decline of
life, to write on these subjects, nothing is more easily answered; for
when I found myself entirely disengaged from business, and the
commonwealth reduced to the necessity of being governed by the direction
and care of one man,<a id="FNA-77"/><a href="#FN-77" class="pginternal"><sup>77</sup></a> I thought it becoming, for the sake of the
public, to instruct my countrymen in philosophy, and that it would be of
importance, and much to the honor and commendation of our city, to have
such great and excellent subjects introduced in the Latin tongue. I the
less repent of my undertaking, since I plainly see that I have excited
in many a desire, not only of learning, but of writing; for we have had
several Romans well grounded in the learning of the Greeks who were
unable to communicate to their countrymen what they had learned, because
they looked upon it as impossible to express that in Latin which they
had received from the Greeks. In this point I think I have succeeded so
well that what I have done is not, even in copiousness of expression,
inferior to that language.</p>
<p>Another inducement to it was a melancholy disposition of mind, and the
great and heavy oppression of fortune that was upon me; from which, if I
could have found any surer remedy, I would not have sought relief in
this pursuit. But I could procure ease by no means better than by not
only applying myself to books, but by devoting myself <a id="page-213"/><span class="pgnum">213</span>to the
examination of the whole body of philosophy. And every part and branch
of this is readily discovered when every question is propounded in
writing; for there is such an admirable continuation and series of
things that each seems connected with the other, and all appear linked
together and united.</p>
<p>V. Now, those men who desire to know my own private opinion on every
particular subject have more curiosity than is necessary. For the force
of reason in disputation is to be sought after rather than authority,
since the authority of the teacher is often a disadvantage to those who
are willing to learn; as they refuse to use their own judgment, and rely
implicitly on him whom they make choice of for a preceptor. Nor could I
ever approve this custom of the Pythagoreans, who, when they affirmed
anything in disputation, and were asked why it was so, used to give this
answer: “He himself has said it;” and this “he himself,” it seems, was
Pythagoras. Such was the force of prejudice and opinion that his
authority was to prevail even without argument or reason.</p>
<p>They who wonder at my being a follower of this sect in particular may
find a satisfactory answer in my four books of Academical Questions. But
I deny that I have undertaken the protection of what is neglected and
forsaken; for the opinions of men do not die with them, though they may
perhaps want the author’s explanation. This manner of philosophizing, of
disputing all things and assuming nothing certainly, was begun by
Socrates, revived by Arcesilaus, confirmed by Carneades, and has
descended, with all its power, even to the present age; but I am
informed that it is now almost exploded even in Greece. However, I do
not impute that to any fault in the institution of the Academy, but to
the negligence of mankind. If it is difficult to know all the doctrines
of any one sect, how much more is it to know those of every sect! which,
however, must necessarily be known to those who resolve, for the sake of
discovering truth, to dispute for or against all philosophers without
partiality.</p>
<p>I do not profess myself to be master of this difficult and noble
faculty; but I do assert that I have endeavored to make myself so; and
it is impossible that they who choose <a id="page-214"/><span class="pgnum">214</span>this manner of philosophizing
should not meet at least with something worthy their pursuit. I have
spoken more fully on this head in another place. But as some are too
slow of apprehension, and some too careless, men stand in perpetual need
of caution. For we are not people who believe that there is nothing
whatever which is true; but we say that some falsehoods are so blended
with all truths, and have so great a resemblance to them, that there is
no certain rule for judging of or assenting to propositions; from which
this maxim also follows, that many things are probable, which, though
they are not evident to the senses, have still so persuasive and
beautiful an aspect that a wise man chooses to direct his conduct by
them.</p>
<p>VI. Now, to free myself from the reproach of partiality, I propose to
lay before you the opinions of various philosophers concerning the
nature of the Gods, by which means all men may judge which of them are
consistent with truth; and if all agree together, or if any one shall be
found to have discovered what may be absolutely called truth, I will
then give up the Academy as vain and arrogant. So I may cry out, in the
words of Statius, in the Synephebi,</p>
<blockquote><div>
<p>Ye Gods, I call upon, require, pray, beseech, entreat, and implore
the attention of my countrymen all, both young and old;</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p class="cont">yet not on so trifling an occasion as when the person in the play
complains that,</p>
<blockquote><div>
<p>In this city we have discovered a most flagrant iniquity: here is a
professed courtesan, who refuses money from her lover;</p>
</div></blockquote>
<p class="cont">but that they may attend, know, and consider what sentiments they ought
to preserve concerning religion, piety, sanctity, ceremonies, faith,
oaths, temples, shrines, and solemn sacrifices; what they ought to think
of the auspices over which I preside;<a id="FNA-78"/><a href="#FN-78" class="pginternal"><sup>78</sup></a> for all these have relation to
the present question. The manifest disagreement among the most learned
on this subject creates doubts in those who imagine they have some
certain knowledge of the subject.</p>
<p>Which fact I have often taken notice of elsewhere, and <a id="page-215"/><span class="pgnum">215</span>I did so more
especially at the discussion that was held at my friend C. Cotta’s
concerning the immortal Gods, and which was carried on with the greatest
care, accuracy, and precision; for coming to him at the time of the
Latin holidays,<a id="FNA-79"/><a href="#FN-79" class="pginternal"><sup>79</sup></a> according to his own invitation and message from
him, I found him sitting in his study,<a id="FNA-80"/><a href="#FN-80" class="pginternal"><sup>80</sup></a> and in a discourse with C.
Velleius, the senator, who was then reputed by the Epicureans the ablest
of our countrymen. Q. Lucilius Balbus was likewise there, a great
proficient in the doctrine of the Stoics, and esteemed equal to the most
eminent of the Greeks in that part of knowledge. As soon as Cotta saw
me, You are come, says he, very seasonably; for I am having a dispute
with Velleius on an important subject, which, considering the nature of
your studies, is not improper for you to join in.</p>
<p>VII. Indeed, says I, I think I am come very seasonably, as you say; for
here are three chiefs of three principal sects met together. If M.
Piso<a id="FNA-81"/><a href="#FN-81" class="pginternal"><sup>81</sup></a> was present, no sect of philosophy that is in any esteem would
want an advocate. If Antiochus’s book, replies Cotta, which he lately
sent to Balbus, says true, you have no occasion to wish for your friend
Piso; for Antiochus is of the opinion that the Stoics do not differ from
the Peripatetics in fact, though they do in words; and I should be glad
to know what you think of that book, Balbus. I? says he. I wonder that
Antiochus, a man of the clearest apprehension, should not see what a
vast difference there is between the Stoics, who distinguish the honest
and the profitable, not only in name, but absolutely in kind, and the
Peripatetics, who blend the honest with the profitable in such a manner
that they differ only in degrees and proportion, and not in kind. This
is not a little difference in words, but a great one in things; <a id="page-216"/><span class="pgnum">216</span>but of
this hereafter. Now, if you think fit, let us return to what we began
with.</p>
<p>With all my heart, says Cotta. But that this visitor (looking at me),
who is just come in, may not be ignorant of what we are upon, I will
inform him that we were discoursing on the nature of the Gods;
concerning which, as it is a subject that always appeared very obscure
to me, I prevailed on Velleius to give us the sentiments of Epicurus.
Therefore, continues he, if it is not troublesome, Velleius, repeat what
you have already stated to us. I will, says he, though this new-comer
will be no advocate for me, but for you; for you have both, adds he,
with a smile, learned from the same Philo to be certain of nothing.<a id="FNA-82"/><a href="#FN-82" class="pginternal"><sup>82</sup></a>
What we have learned from him, replied I, Cotta will discover; but I
would not have you think I am come as an assistant to him, but as an
auditor, with an impartial and unbiassed mind, and not bound by any
obligation to defend any particular principle, whether I like or dislike
it.</p>
<p>VIII. After this, Velleius, with the confidence peculiar to his sect,
dreading nothing so much as to seem to doubt of anything, began as if he
had just then descended from the council of the Gods, and Epicurus’s
intervals of worlds. Do not attend, says he, to these idle and imaginary
tales; nor to the operator and builder of the World, the God of Plato’s
Timæus; nor to the old prophetic dame, the <span class="greek">Πρόνοια</span> of the Stoics, which
the Latins call Providence; nor to that round, that burning, revolving
deity, the World, endowed with sense and understanding; the prodigies
and wonders, not of inquisitive philosophers, but of dreamers!</p>
<p>For with what eyes of the mind was your Plato able to see that workhouse
of such stupendous toil, in which he makes the world to be modelled and
built by God? What materials, what tools, what bars, what machines, what
servants, were employed in so vast a work? How could the air, fire,
water, and earth pay obedience and submit to the will of the architect?
&gt;From whence arose those five forms,<a id="FNA-83"/><a href="#FN-83" class="pginternal"><sup>83</sup></a> of which the rest were composed,
so aptly contributing to frame the mind and produce the senses? It <a id="page-217"/><span class="pgnum">217</span>is
tedious to go through all, as they are of such a sort that they look
more like things to be desired than to be discovered.</p>
<p>But, what is more remarkable, he gives us a world which has been not
only created, but, if I may so say, in a manner formed with hands, and
yet he says it is eternal. Do you conceive him to have the least skill
in natural philosophy who is capable of thinking anything to be
everlasting that had a beginning? For what can possibly ever have been
put together which cannot be dissolved again? Or what is there that had
a beginning which will not have an end? If your Providence, Lucilius, is
the same as Plato’s God, I ask you, as before, who were the assistants,
what were the engines, what was the plan and preparation of the whole
work? If it is not the same, then why did she make the world mortal, and
not everlasting, like Plato’s God?</p>
<p>IX. But I would demand of you both, why these world-builders started up
so suddenly, and lay dormant for so many ages? For we are not to
conclude that, if there was no world, there were therefore no ages. I do
not now speak of such ages as are finished by a certain number of days
and nights in annual courses; for I acknowledge that those could not be
without the revolution of the world; but there was a certain eternity
from infinite time, not measured by any circumscription of seasons; but
how that was in space we cannot understand, because we cannot possibly
have even the slightest idea of time before time was. I desire,
therefore, to know, Balbus, why this Providence of yours was idle for
such an immense space of time? Did she avoid labor? But that could have
no effect on the Deity; nor could there be any labor, since all nature,
air, fire, earth, and water would obey the divine essence. What was it
that incited the Deity to act the part of an ædile, to illuminate and
decorate the world? If it was in order that God might be the better
accommodated in his habitation, then he must have been dwelling an
infinite length of time before in darkness as in a dungeon. But do we
imagine that he was afterward delighted with that variety with which we
see the heaven and earth adorned? What entertainment could that be to
the Deity? If it was any, he would not have been without it so long.</p>
<p><a id="page-218"/><span class="pgnum">218</span>Or were these things made, as you almost assert, by God for the sake of
men? Was it for the wise? If so, then this great design was adopted for
the sake of a very small number. Or for the sake of fools? First of all,
there was no reason why God should consult the advantage of the wicked;
and, further, what could be his object in doing so, since all fools are,
without doubt, the most miserable of men, chiefly because they are
fools? For what can we pronounce more deplorable than folly? Besides,
there are many inconveniences in life which the wise can learn to think
lightly of by dwelling rather on the advantages which they receive; but
which fools are unable to avoid when they are coming, or to bear when
they are come.</p>
<p>X. They who affirm the world to be an animated and intelligent being
have by no means discovered the nature of the mind, nor are able to
conceive in what form that essence can exist; but of that I shall speak
more hereafter. At present I must express my surprise at the weakness of
those who endeavor to make it out to be not only animated and immortal,
but likewise happy, and round, because Plato says that is the most
beautiful form; whereas I think a cylinder, a square, a cone, or a
pyramid more beautiful. But what life do they attribute to that round
Deity? Truly it is a being whirled about with a celerity to which
nothing can be even conceived by the imagination as equal; nor can I
imagine how a settled mind and happy life can consist in such motion,
the least degree of which would be troublesome to us. Why, therefore,
should it not be considered troublesome also to the Deity? For the earth
itself, as it is part of the world, is part also of the Deity. We see
vast tracts of land barren and uninhabitable; some, because they are
scorched by the too near approach of the sun; others, because they are
bound up with frost and snow, through the great distance which the sun
is from them. Therefore, if the world is a Deity, as these are parts of
the world, some of the Deity’s limbs must be said to be scorched, and
some frozen.</p>
<p>These are your doctrines, Lucilius; but what those of others are I will
endeavor to ascertain by tracing them back from the earliest of ancient
philosophers. Thales <a id="page-219"/><span class="pgnum">219</span>the Milesian, who first inquired after such
subjects, asserted water to be the origin of things, and that God was
that mind which formed all things from water. If the Gods can exist
without corporeal sense, and if there can be a mind without a body, why
did he annex a mind to water?</p>
<p>It was Anaximander’s opinion that the Gods were born; that after a great
length of time they died; and that they are innumerable worlds. But what
conception can we possibly have of a Deity who is not eternal?</p>
<p>Anaximenes, after him, taught that the air is God, and that he was
generated, and that he is immense, infinite, and always in motion; as if
air, which has no form, could possibly be God; for the Deity must
necessarily be not only of some form or other, but of the most beautiful
form. Besides, is not everything that had a beginning subject to
mortality?</p>
<p>XI. Anaxagoras, who received his learning from Anaximenes, was the first
who affirmed the system and disposition of all things to be contrived
and perfected by the power and reason of an infinite mind; in which
infinity he did not perceive that there could be no conjunction of sense
and motion, nor any sense in the least degree, where nature herself
could feel no impulse. If he would have this mind to be a sort of
animal, then there must be some more internal principle from whence that
animal should receive its appellation. But what can be more internal
than the mind? Let it, therefore, be clothed with an external body. But
this is not agreeable to his doctrine; but we are utterly unable to
conceive how a pure simple mind can exist without any substance annexed
to it.</p>
<p>Alcmæon of Crotona, in attributing a divinity to the sun, the moon, and
the rest of the stars, and also to the mind, did not perceive that he
was ascribing immortality to mortal beings.</p>
<p>Pythagoras, who supposed the Deity to be one soul, mixing with and
pervading all nature, from which our souls are taken, did not consider
that the Deity himself must, in consequence of this doctrine, be maimed
and torn with the rending every human soul from it; nor that, when the
human mind is afflicted (as is the case in many instances), that part of
the Deity must likewise be afflicted, <a id="page-220"/><span class="pgnum">220</span>which cannot be. If the human
mind were a Deity, how could it be ignorant of any thing? Besides, how
could that Deity, if it is nothing but soul, be mixed with, or infused
into, the world?</p>
<p>Then Xenophanes, who said that everything in the world which had any
existence, with the addition of intellect, was God, is as liable to
exception as the rest, especially in relation to the infinity of it, in
which there can be nothing sentient, nothing composite.</p>
<p>Parmenides formed a conceit to himself of something circular like a
crown. (He names it Stephane.) It is an orb of constant light and heat
around the heavens; this he calls God; in which there is no room to
imagine any divine form or sense. And he uttered many other absurdities
on the same subject; for he ascribed a divinity to war, to discord, to
lust, and other passions of the same kind, which are destroyed by
disease, or sleep, or oblivion, or age. The same honor he gives to the
stars; but I shall forbear making any objections to his system here,
having already done it in another place.</p>
<p>XII. Empedocles, who erred in many things, is most grossly mistaken in
his notion of the Gods. He lays down four natures<a id="FNA-84"/><a href="#FN-84" class="pginternal"><sup>84</sup></a> as divine, from
which he thinks that all things were made. Yet it is evident that they
have a beginning, that they decay, and that they are void of all sense.</p>
<p>Protagoras did not seem to have any idea of the real nature of the Gods;
for he acknowledged that he was altogether ignorant whether there are or
are not any, or what they are.</p>
<p>What shall I say of Democritus, who classes our images of objects, and
their orbs, in the number of the Gods; as he does that principle through
which those images appear and have their influence? He deifies likewise
our knowledge and understanding. Is he not involved in a very great
error? And because nothing continues always in the same state, he denies
that anything is everlasting, does he not thereby entirely destroy the
Deity, and make it impossible to form any opinion of him?</p>
<p><a id="page-221"/><span class="pgnum">221</span>Diogenes of Apollonia looks upon the air to be a Deity. But what sense
can the air have? or what divine form can be attributed to it?</p>
<p>It would be tedious to show the uncertainty of Plato’s opinion; for, in
his Timæus, he denies the propriety of asserting that there is one great
father or creator of the world; and, in his book of Laws, he thinks we
ought not to make too strict an inquiry into the nature of the Deity.
And as for his statement when he asserts that God is a being without any
body—what the Greeks call <span class="greek">ἀσώματος</span>—it is certainly quite
unintelligible how that theory can possibly be true; for such a God must
then necessarily be destitute of sense, prudence, and pleasure; all
which things are comprehended in our notion of the Gods. He likewise
asserts in his Timæus, and in his Laws, that the world, the heavens, the
stars, the mind, and those Gods which are delivered down to us from our
ancestors, constitute the Deity. These opinions, taken separately, are
apparently false; and, together, are directly inconsistent with each
other.</p>
<p>Xenophon has committed almost the same mistakes, but in fewer words. In
those sayings which he has related of Socrates, he introduces him
disputing the lawfulness of inquiring into the form of the Deity, and
makes him assert the sun and the mind to be Deities: he represents him
likewise as affirming the being of one God only, and at another time of
many; which are errors of almost the same kind which I before took
notice of in Plato.</p>
<p>XIII. Antisthenes, in his book called the Natural Philosopher, says that
there are many national and one natural Deity; but by this saying he
destroys the power and nature of the Gods. Speusippus is not much less
in the wrong; who, following his uncle Plato, says that a certain
incorporeal power governs everything; by which he endeavors to root out
of our minds the knowledge of the Gods.</p>
<p>Aristotle, in his third book of Philosophy, confounds many things
together, as the rest have done; but he does not differ from his master
Plato. At one time he attributes all divinity to the mind, at another he
asserts that the world is God. Soon afterward he makes some other
essence <a id="page-222"/><span class="pgnum">222</span>preside over the world, and gives it those faculties by which,
with certain revolutions, he may govern and preserve the motion of it.
Then he asserts the heat of the firmament to be God; not perceiving the
firmament to be part of the world, which in another place he had
described as God. How can that divine sense of the firmament be
preserved in so rapid a motion? And where do the multitude of Gods
dwell, if heaven itself is a Deity? But when this philosopher says that
God is without a body, he makes him an irrational and insensible being.
Besides, how can the world move itself, if it wants a body? Or how, if
it is in perpetual self-motion, can it be easy and happy?</p>
<p>Xenocrates, his fellow-pupil, does not appear much wiser on this head,
for in his books concerning the nature of the Gods no divine form is
described; but he says the number of them is eight. Five are moving
planets;<a id="FNA-85"/><a href="#FN-85" class="pginternal"><sup>85</sup></a> the sixth is contained in all the fixed stars; which,
dispersed, are so many several members, but, considered together, are
one single Deity; the seventh is the sun; and the eighth the moon. But
in what sense they can possibly be happy is not easy to be understood.</p>
<p>From the same school of Plato, Heraclides of Pontus stuffed his books
with puerile tales. Sometimes he thinks the world a Deity, at other
times the mind. He attributes divinity likewise to the wandering stars.
He deprives the Deity of sense, and makes his form mutable; and, in the
same book again, he makes earth and heaven Deities.</p>
<p>The unsteadiness of Theophrastus is equally intolerable. At one time he
attributes a divine prerogative to the mind; at another, to the
firmament; at another, to the stars and celestial constellations.</p>
<p>Nor is his disciple Strato, who is called the naturalist, any more
worthy to be regarded; for he thinks that the divine power is diffused
through nature, which is the cause of birth, increase, and diminution,
but that it has no sense nor form.</p>
<p>XIV. Zeno (to come to your sect, Balbus) thinks the law of nature to be
the divinity, and that it has the power <a id="page-223"/><span class="pgnum">223</span>to force us to what is right,
and to restrain us from what is wrong. How this law can be an animated
being I cannot conceive; but that God is so we would certainly maintain.
The same person says, in another place, that the sky is God; but can we
possibly conceive that God is a being insensible, deaf to our prayers,
our wishes, and our vows, and wholly unconnected with us? In other books
he thinks there is a certain rational essence pervading all nature,
indued with divine efficacy. He attributes the same power to the stars,
to the years, to the months, and to the seasons. In his interpretation
of Hesiod’s Theogony,<a id="FNA-86"/><a href="#FN-86" class="pginternal"><sup>86</sup></a> he entirely destroys the established notions
of the Gods; for he excludes Jupiter, Juno, and Vesta, and those
esteemed divine, from the number of them; but his doctrine is that these
are names which by some kind of allusion are given to mute and inanimate
beings. The sentiments of his disciple Aristo are not less erroneous. He
thought it impossible to conceive the form of the Deity, and asserts
that the Gods are destitute of sense; and he is entirely dubious whether
the Deity is an animated being or not.</p>
<p>Cleanthes, who next comes under my notice, a disciple of Zeno at the
same time with Aristo, in one place says that the world is God; in
another, he attributes divinity to the mind and spirit of universal
nature; then he asserts that the most remote, the highest, the
all-surrounding, the all-enclosing and embracing heat, which is called
the sky, is most certainly the Deity. In the books he wrote against
pleasure, in which he seems to be raving, he imagines the Gods to have a
certain form and shape; then he ascribes all divinity to the stars; and,
lastly, he thinks nothing more divine than reason. So that this God,
whom we know mentally and in the speculations of our minds, from which
traces we receive our impression, has at last actually no visible form
at all.</p>
<p>XV. Persæus, another disciple of Zeno, says that they who have made
discoveries advantageous to the life of man should be esteemed as Gods;
and the very things, he says, which are healthful and beneficial have
derived their names from those of the Gods; so that he thinks it not
sufficient to call them the discoveries of Gods, but he urges that they
<a id="page-224"/><span class="pgnum">224</span>themselves should be deemed divine. What can be more absurd than to
ascribe divine honors to sordid and deformed things; or to place among
the Gods men who are dead and mixed with the dust, to whose memory all
the respect that could be paid would be but mourning for their loss?</p>
<p>Chrysippus, who is looked upon as the most subtle interpreter of the
dreams of the Stoics, has mustered up a numerous band of unknown Gods;
and so unknown that we are not able to form any idea about them, though
our mind seems capable of framing any image to itself in its thoughts.
For he says that the divine power is placed in reason, and in the spirit
and mind of universal nature; that the world, with a universal effusion
of its spirit, is God; that the superior part of that spirit, which is
the mind and reason, is the great principle of nature, containing and
preserving the chain of all things; that the divinity is the power of
fate, and the necessity of future events. He deifies fire also, and what
I before called the ethereal spirit, and those elements which naturally
proceed from it—water, earth, and air. He attributes divinity to the
sun, moon, stars, and universal space, the grand container of all
things, and to those men likewise who have obtained immortality. He
maintains the sky to be what men call Jupiter; the air, which pervades
the sea, to be Neptune; and the earth, Ceres. In like manner he goes
through the names of the other Deities. He says that Jupiter is that
immutable and eternal law which guides and directs us in our manners;
and this he calls fatal necessity, the everlasting verity of future
events. But none of these are of such a nature as to seem to carry any
indication of divine virtue in them. These are the doctrines contained
in his first book of the Nature of the Gods. In the second, he endeavors
to accommodate the fables of Orpheus, Musæus, Hesiod, and Homer to what
he has advanced in the first, in order that the most ancient poets, who
never dreamed of these things, may seem to have been Stoics. Diogenes
the Babylonian was a follower of the doctrine of Chrysippus; and in that
book which he wrote, entitled “A Treatise concerning Minerva,” he
separates the account of Jupiter’s bringing-forth, and the birth of that
virgin, from the fabulous, and reduces it to a natural construction.</p>
<p><a id="page-225"/><span class="pgnum">225</span>XVI. Thus far have I been rather exposing the dreams of dotards than
giving the opinions of philosophers. Not much more absurd than these are
the fables of the poets, who owe all their power of doing harm to the
sweetness of their language; who have represented the Gods as enraged
with anger and inflamed with lust; who have brought before our eyes
their wars, battles, combats, wounds; their hatreds, dissensions,
discords, births, deaths, complaints, and lamentations; their
indulgences in all kinds of intemperance; their adulteries; their
chains; their amours with mortals, and mortals begotten by immortals. To
these idle and ridiculous flights of the poets we may add the prodigious
stories invented by the Magi, and by the Egyptians also, which were of
the same nature, together with the extravagant notions of the multitude
at all times, who, from total ignorance of the truth, are always
fluctuating in uncertainty.</p>
<p>Now, whoever reflects on the rashness and absurdity of these tenets must
inevitably entertain the highest respect and veneration for Epicurus,
and perhaps even rank him in the number of those beings who are the
subject of this dispute; for he alone first founded the idea of the
existence of the Gods on the impression which nature herself hath made
on the minds of all men. For what nation, what people are there, who
have not, without any learning, a natural idea, or prenotion, of a
Deity? Epicurus calls this <span class="greek">πρόληψις</span>; that is, an antecedent conception
of the fact in the mind, without which nothing can be understood,
inquired after, or discoursed on; the force and advantage of which
reasoning we receive from that celestial volume of Epicurus concerning
the Rule and Judgment of Things.</p>
<p>XVII. Here, then, you see the foundation of this question clearly laid;
for since it is the constant and universal opinion of mankind,
independent of education, custom, or law, that there are Gods, it must
necessarily follow that this knowledge is implanted in our minds, or,
rather, innate in us. That opinion respecting which there is a general
agreement in universal nature must infallibly be true; therefore it must
be allowed that there are Gods; for in this we have the concurrence, not
only of almost all philosophers, but likewise of the ignorant and
illiterate. It <a id="page-226"/><span class="pgnum">226</span>must be also confessed that the point is established
that we have naturally this idea, as I said before, or prenotion, of the
existence of the Gods. As new things require new names, so that
prenotion was called <span class="greek">πρόληψις</span> by Epicurus; an appellation never used
before. On the same principle of reasoning, we think that the Gods are
happy and immortal; for that nature which hath assured us that there are
Gods has likewise imprinted in our minds the knowledge of their
immortality and felicity; and if so, what Epicurus hath declared in
these words is true: “That which is eternally happy cannot be burdened
with any labor itself, nor can it impose any labor on another; nor can
it be influenced by resentment or favor: because things which are liable
to such feelings must be weak and frail.” We have said enough to prove
that we should worship the Gods with piety, and without superstition, if
that were the only question.</p>
<p>For the superior and excellent nature of the Gods requires a pious
adoration from men, because it is possessed of immortality and the most
exalted felicity; for whatever excels has a right to veneration, and all
fear of the power and anger of the Gods should be banished; for we must
understand that anger and affection are inconsistent with the nature of
a happy and immortal being. These apprehensions being removed, no dread
of the superior powers remains. To confirm this opinion, our curiosity
leads us to inquire into the form and life and action of the intellect
and spirit of the Deity.</p>
<p>XVIII. With regard to his form, we are directed partly by nature and
partly by reason. All men are told by nature that none but a human form
can be ascribed to the Gods; for under what other image did it ever
appear to any one either sleeping or waking? and, without having
recourse to our first notions,<a id="FNA-87"/><a href="#FN-87" class="pginternal"><sup>87</sup></a> reason itself declares the same; for
as it is easy to conceive that the most excellent nature, either because
of its happiness or immortality, should be the most beautiful, what
composition of limbs, what conformation of lineaments, what form, what
aspect, can be more beautiful than the human? Your sect, Lucilius (not
like my friend Cotta, who sometimes says one <a id="page-227"/><span class="pgnum">227</span>thing and sometimes
another), when they represent the divine art and workmanship in the
human body, are used to describe how very completely each member is
formed, not only for convenience, but also for beauty. Therefore, if the
human form excels that of all other animal beings, as God himself is an
animated being, he must surely be of that form which is the most
beautiful. Besides, the Gods are granted to be perfectly happy; and
nobody can be happy without virtue, nor can virtue exist where reason is
not; and reason can reside in none but the human form; the Gods,
therefore, must be acknowledged to be of human form; yet that form is
not body, but something like body; nor does it contain any blood, but
something like blood. Though these distinctions were more acutely
devised and more artfully expressed by Epicurus than any common capacity
can comprehend; yet, depending on your understanding, I shall be more
brief on the subject than otherwise I should be. Epicurus, who not only
discovered and understood the occult and almost hidden secrets of
nature, but explained them with ease, teaches that the power and nature
of the Gods is not to be discerned by the senses, but by the mind; nor
are they to be considered as bodies of any solidity, or reducible to
number, like those things which, because of their firmness, he calls
<span class="greek">Στερέμνια</span>;<a id="FNA-88"/><a href="#FN-88" class="pginternal"><sup>88</sup></a> but as images, perceived by similitude and transition. As
infinite kinds of those images result from innumerable individuals, and
centre in the Gods, our minds and understanding are directed towards and
fixed with the greatest delight on them, in order to comprehend what
that happy and eternal essence is.</p>
<p>XIX. Surely the mighty power of the Infinite Being is most worthy our
great and earnest contemplation; the nature of which we must necessarily
understand to be such that everything in it is made to correspond
completely to some other answering part. This is called by Epicurus
<span class="greek">ἰσονομία</span>; that is to say, an equal distribution or even disposition of
things. From hence he draws this inference, <a id="page-228"/><span class="pgnum">228</span>that, as there is such a
vast multitude of mortals, there cannot be a less number of immortals;
and if those which perish are innumerable, those which are preserved
ought also to be countless. Your sect, Balbus, frequently ask us how the
Gods live, and how they pass their time? Their life is the most happy,
and the most abounding with all kinds of blessings, which can be
conceived. They do nothing. They are embarrassed with no business; nor
do they perform any work. They rejoice in the possession of their own
wisdom and virtue. They are satisfied that they shall ever enjoy the
fulness of eternal pleasures.</p>
<p>XX. Such a Deity may properly be called happy; but yours is a most
laborious God. For let us suppose the world a Deity—what can be a more
uneasy state than, without the least cessation, to be whirled about the
axle-tree of heaven with a surprising celerity? But nothing can be happy
that is not at ease. Or let us suppose a Deity residing in the world,
who directs and governs it, who preserves the courses of the stars, the
changes of the seasons, and the vicissitudes and orders of things,
surveying the earth and the sea, and accommodating them to the advantage
and necessities of man. Truly this Deity is embarrassed with a very
troublesome and laborious office. We make a happy life to consist in a
tranquillity of mind, a perfect freedom from care, and an exemption from
all employment. The philosopher from whom we received all our knowledge
has taught us that the world was made by nature; that there was no
occasion for a workhouse to frame it in; and that, though you deny the
possibility of such a work without divine skill, it is so easy to her,
that she has made, does make, and will make innumerable worlds. But,
because you do not conceive that nature is able to produce such effects
without some rational aid, you are forced, like the tragic poets, when
you cannot wind up your argument in any other way, to have recourse to a
Deity, whose assistance you would not seek, if you could view that vast
and unbounded magnitude of regions in all parts; where the mind,
extending and spreading itself, travels so far and wide that it can find
no end, no extremity to stop at. In this immensity of breadth, length,
and height, a most boundless company of innumerable atoms <a id="page-229"/><span class="pgnum">229</span>are
fluttering about, which, notwithstanding the interposition of a void
space, meet and cohere, and continue clinging to one another; and by
this union these modifications and forms of things arise, which, in your
opinions, could not possibly be made without the help of bellows and
anvils. Thus you have imposed on us an eternal master, whom we must
dread day and night. For who can be free from fear of a Deity who
foresees, regards, and takes notice of everything; one who thinks all
things his own; a curious, ever-busy God?</p>
<p>Hence first arose your <span class="greek">Εἱμαρμένη</span>, as you call it, your fatal necessity;
so that, whatever happens, you affirm that it flows from an eternal
chain and continuance of causes. Of what value is this philosophy,
which, like old women and illiterate men, attributes everything to fate?
Then follows your <span class="greek">μαντικὴ</span>, in Latin called <i>divinatio</i>, divination;
which, if we would listen to you, would plunge us into such superstition
that we should fall down and worship your inspectors into sacrifices,
your augurs, your soothsayers, your prophets, and your fortune-tellers.</p>
<p>Epicurus having freed us from these terrors and restored us to liberty,
we have no dread of those beings whom we have reason to think entirely
free from all trouble themselves, and who do not impose any on others.
We pay our adoration, indeed, with piety and reverence to that essence
which is above all excellence and perfection. But I fear my zeal for
this doctrine has made me too prolix. However, I could not easily leave
so eminent and important a subject unfinished, though I must confess I
should rather endeavor to hear than speak so long.</p>
<p>XXI. Cotta, with his usual courtesy, then began. Velleius, says he, were
it not for something which you have advanced, I should have remained
silent; for I have often observed, as I did just now upon hearing you,
that I cannot so easily conceive why a proposition is true as why it is
false. Should you ask me what I take the nature of the Gods to be, I
should perhaps make no answer. But if you should ask whether I think it
to be of that nature which you have described, I should answer that I
was as far as possible from agreeing with you. However, before I enter
on the subject of your discourse and what you <a id="page-230"/><span class="pgnum">230</span>have advanced upon it, I
will give you my opinion of yourself. Your intimate friend, L. Crassus,
has been often heard by me to say that you were beyond all question
superior to all our learned Romans; and that few Epicureans in Greece
were to be compared to you. But as I knew what a wonderful esteem he had
for you, I imagined that might make him the more lavish in commendation
of you. Now, however, though I do not choose to praise any one when
present, yet I must confess that I think you have delivered your
thoughts clearly on an obscure and very intricate subject; that you are
not only copious in your sentiments, but more elegant in your language
than your sect generally are. When I was at Athens, I went often to hear
Zeno, by the advice of Philo, who used to call him the chief of the
Epicureans; partly, probably, in order to judge more easily how
completely those principles could be refuted after I had heard them
stated by the most learned of the Epicureans. And, indeed, he did not
speak in any ordinary manner; but, like you, with clearness, gravity,
and elegance; yet what frequently gave me great uneasiness when I heard
him, as it did while I attended to you, was to see so excellent a genius
falling into such frivolous (excuse my freedom), not to say foolish,
doctrines. However, I shall not at present offer anything better; for,
as I said before, we can in most subjects, especially in physics, sooner
discover what is not true than what is.</p>
<p>XXII. If you should ask me what God is, or what his character and nature
are, I should follow the example of Simonides, who, when Hiero the
tyrant proposed the same question to him, desired a day to consider of
it. When he required his answer the next day, Simonides begged two days
more; and as he kept constantly desiring double the number which he had
required before instead of giving his answer, Hiero, with surprise,
asked him his meaning in doing so: “Because,” says he, “the longer I
meditate on it, the more obscure it appears to me.” Simonides, who was
not only a delightful poet, but reputed a wise and learned man in other
branches of knowledge, found, I suppose, so many acute and refined
arguments occurring to him, that he was doubtful which was the truest,
and therefore despaired of discovering any truth.</p>
<p><a id="page-231"/><span class="pgnum">231</span>But does your Epicurus (for I had rather contend with him than with
you) say anything that is worthy the name of philosophy, or even of
common-sense?</p>
<p>In the question concerning the nature of the Gods, his first inquiry is,
whether there are Gods or not. It would be dangerous, I believe, to take
the negative side before a public auditory; but it is very safe in a
discourse of this kind, and in this company. I, who am a priest, and who
think that religions and ceremonies ought sacredly to be maintained, am
certainly desirous to have the existence of the Gods, which is the
principal point in debate, not only fixed in opinion, but proved to a
demonstration; for many notions flow into and disturb the mind which
sometimes seem to convince us that there are none. But see how candidly
I will behave to you: as I shall not touch upon those tenets you hold in
common with other philosophers, consequently I shall not dispute the
existence of the Gods, for that doctrine is agreeable to almost all men,
and to myself in particular; but I am still at liberty to find fault
with the reasons you give for it, which I think are very insufficient.</p>
<p>XXIII. You have said that the general assent of men of all nations and
all degrees is an argument strong enough to induce us to acknowledge the
being of the Gods. This is not only a weak, but a false, argument; for,
first of all, how do you know the opinions of all nations? I really
believe there are many people so savage that they have no thoughts of a
Deity. What think you of Diagoras, who was called the atheist; and of
Theodorus after him? Did not they plainly deny the very essence of a
Deity? Protagoras of Abdera, whom you just now mentioned, the greatest
sophist of his age, was banished by order of the Athenians from their
city and territories, and his books were publicly burned, because these
words were in the beginning of his treatise concerning the Gods: “I am
unable to arrive at any knowledge whether there are, or are not, any
Gods.” This treatment of him, I imagine, restrained many from professing
their disbelief of a Deity, since the doubt of it only could not escape
punishment. What shall we say of the sacrilegious, the impious, and the
perjured? If Tubulus Lucius, Lupus, or Carbo the son of <a id="page-232"/><span class="pgnum">232</span>Neptune, as
Lucilius says, had believed that there were Gods, would either of them
have carried his perjuries and impieties to such excess? Your reasoning,
therefore, to confirm your assertion is not so conclusive as you think
it is. But as this is the manner in which other philosophers have argued
on the same subject, I will take no further notice of it at present; I
rather choose to proceed to what is properly your own.</p>
<p>I allow that there are Gods. Instruct me, then, concerning their origin;
inform me where they are, what sort of body, what mind, they have, and
what is their course of life; for these I am desirous of knowing. You
attribute the most absolute power and efficacy to atoms. Out of them you
pretend that everything is made. But there are no atoms, for there is
nothing without body; every place is occupied by body, therefore there
can be no such thing as a vacuum or an atom.</p>
<p>XXIV. I advance these principles of the naturalists without knowing
whether they are true or false; yet they are more like truth than those
statements of yours; for they are the absurdities in which Democritus,
or before him Leucippus, used to indulge, saying that there are certain
light corpuscles—some smooth, some rough, some round, some square, some
crooked and bent as bows—which by a fortuitous concourse made heaven
and earth, without the influence of any natural power. This opinion, C.
Velleius, you have brought down to these our times; and you would sooner
be deprived of the greatest advantages of life than of that authority;
for before you were acquainted with those tenets, you thought that you
ought to profess yourself an Epicurean; so that it was necessary that
you should either embrace these absurdities or lose the philosophical
character which you had taken upon you; and what could bribe you to
renounce the Epicurean opinion? Nothing, you say, can prevail on you to
forsake the truth and the sure means of a happy life. But is that the
truth? for I shall not contest your happy life, which you think the
Deity himself does not enjoy unless he languishes in idleness. But where
is truth? Is it in your innumerable worlds, some of which are rising,
some falling, at every moment of time? Or is it in your atomical
corpuscles, <a id="page-233"/><span class="pgnum">233</span>which form such excellent works without the direction of
any natural power or reason? But I was forgetting my liberality, which I
had promised to exert in your case, and exceeding the bounds which I at
first proposed to myself. Granting, then, everything to be made of
atoms, what advantage is that to your argument? For we are searching
after the nature of the Gods; and allowing them to be made of atoms,
they cannot be eternal, because whatever is made of atoms must have had
a beginning: if so, there were no Gods till there was this beginning;
and if the Gods have had a beginning, they must necessarily have an end,
as you have before contended when you were discussing Plato’s world.
Where, then, is your beatitude and immortality, in which two words you
say that God is expressed, the endeavor to prove which reduces you to
the greatest perplexities? For you said that God had no body, but
something like body; and no blood, but something like blood.</p>
<p>XXV. It is a frequent practice among you, when you assert anything that
has no resemblance to truth, and wish to avoid reprehension, to advance
something else which is absolutely and utterly impossible, in order that
it may seem to your adversaries better to grant that point which has
been a matter of doubt than to keep on pertinaciously contradicting you
on every point: like Epicurus, who, when he found that if his atoms were
allowed to descend by their own weight, our actions could not be in our
own power, because their motions would be certain and necessary,
invented an expedient, which escaped Democritus, to avoid necessity. He
says that when the atoms descend by their own weight and gravity, they
move a little obliquely. Surely, to make such an assertion as this is
what one ought more to be ashamed of than the acknowledging ourselves
unable to defend the proposition. His practice is the same against the
logicians, who say that in all propositions in which yes or no is
required, one of them must be true; he was afraid that if this were
granted, then, in such a proposition as “Epicurus will be alive or dead
to-morrow,” either one or the other must necessarily be admitted;
therefore he absolutely denied the necessity of yes or no. Can anything
<a id="page-234"/><span class="pgnum">234</span>show stupidity in a greater degree? Zeno,<a id="FNA-89"/><a href="#FN-89" class="pginternal"><sup>89</sup></a> being pressed by
Arcesilas, who pronounced all things to be false which are perceived by
the senses, said that some things were false, but not all. Epicurus was
afraid that if any one thing seen should be false, nothing could be
true; and therefore he asserted all the senses to be infallible
directors of truth. Nothing can be more rash than this; for by
endeavoring to repel a light stroke, he receives a heavy blow. On the
subject of the nature of the Gods, he falls into the same errors. While
he would avoid the concretion of individual bodies, lest death and
dissolution should be the consequence, he denies that the Gods have
body, but says they have something like body; and says they have no
blood, but something like blood.</p>
<p>XXVI. It seems an unaccountable thing how one soothsayer can refrain
from laughing when he sees another. It is yet a greater wonder that you
can refrain from laughing among yourselves. It is no body, but something
like body! I could understand this if it were applied to statues made of
wax or clay; but in regard to the Deity, I am not able to discover what
is meant by a quasi-body or quasi-blood. Nor indeed are you, Velleius,
though you will not confess so much. For those precepts are delivered to
you as dictates which Epicurus carelessly blundered out; for he boasted,
as we see in his writings, that he had no instructor, which I could
easily believe without his public declaration of it, for the same reason
that I could believe the master of a very bad edifice if he were to
boast that he had no architect but himself: for there is nothing of the
Academy, nothing of the Lyceum, in his doctrine; nothing but
puerilities. He might have been a pupil of Xenocrates. O ye immortal
Gods, what a teacher was he! And there are those who believe that he
actually was his pupil; but he says otherwise, and I shall give more
credit to his word than to another’s. He confesses that he was a pupil
of a certain disciple of Plato, one Pamphilus, at Samos; for he lived
there when he was young, with his father and his brothers. His father,
Neocles, was a farmer in those parts; <a id="page-235"/><span class="pgnum">235</span>but as the farm, I suppose, was
not sufficient to maintain him, he turned school-master; yet Epicurus
treats this Platonic philosopher with wonderful contempt, so fearful was
he that it should be thought he had ever had any instruction. But it is
well known he had been a pupil of Nausiphanes, the follower of
Democritus; and since he could not deny it, he loaded him with insults
in abundance. If he never heard a lecture on these Democritean
principles, what lectures did he ever hear? What is there in Epicurus’s
physics that is not taken from Democritus? For though he altered some
things, as what I mentioned before of the oblique motions of the atoms,
yet most of his doctrines are the same; his atoms—his vacuum—his
images—infinity of space—innumerable worlds, their rise and decay—and
almost every part of natural learning that he treats of.</p>
<p>Now, do you understand what is meant by quasi-body and quasi-blood? For
I not only acknowledge that you are a better judge of it than I am, but
I can bear it without envy. If any sentiments, indeed, are communicated
without obscurity, what is there that Velleius can understand and Cotta
not? I know what body is, and what blood is; but I cannot possibly find
out the meaning of quasi-body and quasi-blood. Not that you
intentionally conceal your principles from me, as Pythagoras did his
from those who were not his disciples; or that you are intentionally
obscure, like Heraclitus. But the truth is (which I may venture to say
in this company), you do not understand them yourself.</p>
<p>XXVII. This, I perceive, is what you contend for, that the Gods have a
certain figure that has nothing concrete, nothing solid, nothing of
express substance, nothing prominent in it; but that it is pure, smooth,
and transparent. Let us suppose the same with the Venus of Cos, which is
not a body, but the representation of a body; nor is the red, which is
drawn there and mixed with the white, real blood, but a certain
resemblance of blood; so in Epicurus’s Deity there is no real substance,
but the resemblance of substance.</p>
<p>Let me take for granted that which is perfectly unintelligible; then
tell me what are the lineaments and figures <a id="page-236"/><span class="pgnum">236</span>of these sketched-out
Deities. Here you have plenty of arguments by which you would show the
Gods to be in human form. The first is, that our minds are so
anticipated and prepossessed, that whenever we think of a Deity the
human shape occurs to us. The next is, that as the divine nature excels
all things, so it ought to be of the most beautiful form, and there is
no form more beautiful than the human; and the third is, that reason
cannot reside in any other shape.</p>
<p>First, let us consider each argument separately. You seem to me to
assume a principle, despotically I may say, that has no manner of
probability in it. Who was ever so blind, in contemplating these
subjects, as not to see that the Gods were represented in human form,
either by the particular advice of wise men, who thought by those means
the more easily to turn the minds of the ignorant from a depravity of
manners to the worship of the Gods; or through superstition, which was
the cause of their believing that when they were paying adoration to
these images they were approaching the Gods themselves. These conceits
were not a little improved by the poets, painters, and artificers; for
it would not have been very easy to represent the Gods planning and
executing any work in another form, and perhaps this opinion arose from
the idea which mankind have of their own beauty. But do not you, who are
so great an adept in physics, see what a soothing flatterer, what a sort
of procuress, nature is to herself? Do you think there is any creature
on the land or in the sea that is not highly delighted with its own
form? If it were not so, why would not a bull become enamored of a mare,
or a horse of a cow? Do you believe an eagle, a lion, or a dolphin
prefers any shape to its own? If nature, therefore, has instructed us in
the same manner, that nothing is more beautiful than man, what wonder is
it that we, for that reason, should imagine the Gods are of the human
form? Do you suppose if beasts were endowed with reason that every one
would not give the prize of beauty to his own species?</p>
<p>XXVIII. Yet, by Hercules (I speak as I think)! though I am fond enough
of myself, I dare not say that I excel in beauty that bull which carried
Europa. For the question <a id="page-237"/><span class="pgnum">237</span>here is not concerning our genius and
elocution, but our species and figure. If we could make and assume to
ourselves any form, would you be unwilling to resemble the sea-triton as
he is painted supported swimming on sea-monsters whose bodies are partly
human? Here I touch on a difficult point; for so great is the force of
nature that there is no man who would not choose to be like a man, nor,
indeed, any ant that would not be like an ant. But like what man? For
how few can pretend to beauty! When I was at Athens, the whole flock of
youths afforded scarcely one. You laugh, I see; but what I tell you is
the truth. Nay, to us who, after the examples of ancient philosophers,
delight in boys, defects are often pleasing. Alcæus was charmed with a
wart on a boy’s knuckle; but a wart is a blemish on the body; yet it
seemed a beauty to him. Q. Catulus, my friend and colleague’s father,
was enamored with your fellow-citizen Roscius, on whom he wrote these
verses:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>As once I stood to hail the rising day,</p>
<p class="L2">Roscius appearing on the left I spied:</p>
<p>Forgive me, Gods, if I presume to say</p>
<p class="L2">The mortal’s beauty with th’ immortal vied.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Roscius more beautiful than a God! yet he was then, as he now is,
squint-eyed. But what signifies that, if his defects were beauties to
Catulus?</p>
<p>XXIX. I return to the Gods. Can we suppose any of them to be
squint-eyed, or even to have a cast in the eye? Have they any warts? Are
any of them hook-nosed, flap-eared, beetle-browed, or jolt-headed, as
some of us are? Or are they free from imperfections? Let us grant you
that. Are they all alike in the face? For if they are many, then one
must necessarily be more beautiful than another, and then there must be
some Deity not absolutely most beautiful. Or if their faces are all
alike, there would be an Academy<a id="FNA-90"/><a href="#FN-90" class="pginternal"><sup>90</sup></a> in heaven; for if one God does not
differ from another, there is no possibility of knowing or
distinguishing them.</p>
<p>What if your assertion, Velleius, proves absolutely false, that no form
occurs to us, in our contemplations on the <a id="page-238"/><span class="pgnum">238</span>Deity, but the human? Will
you, notwithstanding that, persist in the defence of such an absurdity?
Supposing that form occurs to us, as you say it does, and we know
Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, Neptune, Vulcan, Apollo, and the other Deities,
by the countenance which painters and statuaries have given them, and
not only by their countenances, but by their decorations, their age, and
attire; yet the Egyptians, the Syrians, and almost all barbarous
nations,<a id="FNA-91"/><a href="#FN-91" class="pginternal"><sup>91</sup></a> are without such distinctions. You may see a greater regard
paid by them to certain beasts than by us to the most sacred temples and
images of the Gods; for many shrines have been rifled, and images of the
Deities have been carried from their most sacred places by us; but we
never heard that an Egyptian offered any violence to a crocodile, an
ibis, or a cat. What do you think, then? Do not the Egyptians esteem
their sacred bull, their Apis, as a Deity? Yes, by Hercules! as
certainly as you do our protectress Juno, whom you never behold, even in
your dreams, without a goat-skin, a spear, a shield, and broad sandals.
But the Grecian Juno of Argos and the Roman Juno are not represented in
this manner; so that the Grecians, the Lanuvinians, and we, ascribe
different forms to Juno; and our Capitoline Jupiter is not the same with
the Jupiter Ammon of the Africans.</p>
<p>XXX. Therefore, ought not a natural philosopher—that is, an inquirer
into the secrets of nature—to be ashamed of seeking a testimony to
truth from minds prepossessed by custom? According to the rule you have
laid down, it may be said that Jupiter is always bearded, Apollo always
beardless; that Minerva has gray and Neptune azure eyes; and, indeed, we
must then honor that Vulcan at Athens, made by Alcamenes, whose lameness
through his thin robes appears to be no deformity. Shall we, therefore,
receive a lame Deity because we have such an account of him?</p>
<p>Consider, likewise, that the Gods go by what names we give them. Now, in
the first place, they have as many names as men have languages; for
Vulcan is not called Vulcan in Italy, Africa, or Spain, as you are
called Velleius in all countries. Besides, the Gods are innumerable,
though the list of their names is of no great length even <a id="page-239"/><span class="pgnum">239</span>in the
records of our priests. Have they no names? You must necessarily
confess, indeed, they have none; for what occasion is there for
different names if their persons are alike?</p>
<p>How much more laudable would it be, Velleius, to acknowledge that you do
not know what you do not know than to follow a man whom you must
despise! Do you think the Deity is like either me or you? You do not
really think he is like either of us. What is to be done, then? Shall I
call the sun, the moon, or the sky a Deity? If so, they are consequently
happy. But what pleasures can they enjoy? And they are wise too. But how
can wisdom reside in such shapes? These are your own principles.
Therefore, if they are not of human form, as I have proved, and if you
cannot persuade yourself that they are of any other, why are you
cautious of denying absolutely the being of any Gods? You dare not deny
it—which is very prudent in you, though here you are not afraid of the
people, but of the Gods themselves. I have known Epicureans who
reverence<a id="FNA-92"/><a href="#FN-92" class="pginternal"><sup>92</sup></a> even the least images of the Gods, though I perceive it to
be the opinion of some that Epicurus, through fear of offending against
the Athenian laws, has allowed a Deity in words and destroyed him in
fact; so in those his select and short sentences, which are called by
you <span class="greek">κυρίαι δόξαι</span>,<a id="FNA-93"/><a href="#FN-93" class="pginternal"><sup>93</sup></a> this, I think, is the first: “That being which is
happy and immortal is not burdened with any labor, and does not impose
any on any one else.”</p>
<p>XXXI. In his statement of this sentence, some think that he avoided
speaking clearly on purpose, though it was manifestly without design.
But they judge ill of a man who had not the least art. It is doubtful
whether he means that there is any being happy and immortal, or that if
there is any being happy, he must likewise be immortal. They do not
consider that he speaks here, indeed, ambiguously; but in many other
places both he and Metrodorus explain themselves as clearly as you have
done. But he believed there are Gods; nor have I ever seen any one <a id="page-240"/><span class="pgnum">240</span>who
was more exceedingly afraid of what he declared ought to be no objects
of fear, namely, death and the Gods, with the apprehensions of which the
common rank of people are very little affected; but he says that the
minds of all mortals are terrified by them. Many thousands of men commit
robberies in the face of death; others rifle all the temples they can
get into: such as these, no doubt, must be greatly terrified, the one by
the fears of death, and the others by the fear of the Gods.</p>
<p>But since you dare not (for I am now addressing my discourse to Epicurus
himself) absolutely deny the existence of the Gods, what hinders you
from ascribing a divine nature to the sun, the world, or some eternal
mind? I never, says he, saw wisdom and a rational soul in any but a
human form. What! did you ever observe anything like the sun, the moon,
or the five moving planets? The sun, terminating his course in two
extreme parts of one circle,<a id="FNA-94"/><a href="#FN-94" class="pginternal"><sup>94</sup></a> finishes his annual revolutions. The
moon, receiving her light from the sun, completes the same course in
the space of a month.<a id="FNA-95"/><a href="#FN-95" class="pginternal"><sup>95</sup></a> The five planets in the same circle, some
nearer, others more remote from the earth, begin the same courses
together, and finish them in different spaces of time. Did you ever
observe anything like this, Epicurus? So that, according to you, there
can be neither sun, moon, nor stars, because nothing can exist but what
we have touched or seen.<a id="FNA-96"/><a href="#FN-96" class="pginternal"><sup>96</sup></a> What! have you ever seen the Deity himself?
Why else do you believe there is any? If this doctrine prevails, we must
reject all that history relates or reason discovers; and the people who
inhabit inland countries must not believe there is such a thing as the
sea. This is so narrow a way of thinking that if you had been born in
Seriphus, and never had been from out of that island, where you had
frequently been in the habit of seeing little hares and foxes, you would
not, therefore, believe that there are such beasts as lions and
panthers; <a id="page-241"/><span class="pgnum">241</span>and if any one should describe an elephant to you, you would
think that he designed to laugh at you.</p>
<p>XXXII. You indeed, Velleius, have concluded your argument, not after the
manner of your own sect, but of the logicians, to which your people are
utter strangers. You have taken it for granted that the Gods are happy.
I allow it. You say that without virtue no one can be happy. I willingly
concur with you in this also. You likewise say that virtue cannot reside
where reason is not. That I must necessarily allow. You add, moreover,
that reason cannot exist but in a human form. Who, do you think, will
admit that? If it were true, what occasion was there to come so
gradually to it? And to what purpose? You might have answered it on your
own authority. I perceive your gradations from happiness to virtue, and
from virtue to reason; but how do you come from reason to human form?
There, indeed, you do not descend by degrees, but precipitately.</p>
<p>Nor can I conceive why Epicurus should rather say the Gods are like men
than that men are like the Gods. You ask what is the difference; for,
say you, if this is like that, that is like this. I grant it; but this I
assert, that the Gods could not take their form from men; for the Gods
always existed, and never had a beginning, if they are to exist
eternally; but men had a beginning: therefore that form, of which the
immortal Gods are, must have had existence before mankind; consequently,
the Gods should not be said to be of human form, but our form should be
called divine. However, let this be as you will. I now inquire how this
extraordinary good fortune came about; for you deny that reason had any
share in the formation of things. But still, what was this extraordinary
fortune? Whence proceeded that happy concourse of atoms which gave so
sudden a rise to men in the form of Gods? Are we to suppose the divine
seed fell from heaven upon earth, and that men sprung up in the likeness
of their celestial sires? I wish you would assert it; for I should not
be unwilling to acknowledge my relation to the Gods. But you say nothing
like it; no, our resemblance to the Gods, it seems, was by chance. Must
I now seek for arguments to refute this doctrine seriously? I wish I
could <a id="page-242"/><span class="pgnum">242</span>as easily discover what is true as I can overthrow what is false.</p>
<p>XXXIII. You have enumerated with so ready a memory, and so copiously,
the opinions of philosophers, from Thales the Milesian, concerning the
nature of the Gods, that I am surprised to see so much learning in a
Roman. But do you think they were all madmen who thought that a Deity
could by some possibility exist without hands and feet? Does not even
this consideration have weight with you when you consider what is the
use and advantage of limbs in men, and lead you to admit that the Gods
have no need of them? What necessity can there be of feet, without
walking; or of hands, if there is nothing to be grasped? The same may be
asked of the other parts of the body, in which nothing is vain, nothing
useless, nothing superfluous; therefore we may infer that no art can
imitate the skill of nature. Shall the Deity, then, have a tongue, and
not speak—teeth, palate, and jaws, though he will have no use for them?
Shall the members which nature has given to the body for the sake of
generation be useless to the Deity? Nor would the internal parts be less
superfluous than the external. What comeliness is there in the heart,
the lungs, the liver, and the rest of them, abstracted from their use? I
mention these because you place them in the Deity on account of the
beauty of the human form.</p>
<p>Depending on these dreams, not only Epicurus, Metrodorus, and Hermachus
declaimed against Pythagoras, Plato, and Empedocles, but that little
harlot Leontium presumed to write against Theophrastus: indeed, she had
a neat Attic style; but yet, to think of her arguing against
Theophrastus! So much did the garden of Epicurus<a id="FNA-97"/><a href="#FN-97" class="pginternal"><sup>97</sup></a> abound with these
liberties, and, indeed, you are always complaining against them. Zeno
wrangled. Why need I mention Albutius? Nothing could be more elegant or
humane than Phædrus; yet a sharp expression would disgust the old man.
Epicurus treated Aristotle with great contumely. He foully slandered
Phædo, the disciple of Socrates. He pelted Timocrates, the brother of
his companion Metrodorus, with whole volumes, because he disagreed with
him in some trifling point of philosophy. He <a id="page-243"/><span class="pgnum">243</span>was ungrateful even to
Democritus, whose follower he was; and his master Nausiphanes, from whom
he learned nothing, had no better treatment from him.</p>
<p>XXXIV. Zeno gave abusive language not only to those who were then
living, as Apollodorus, Syllus, and the rest, but he called Socrates,
who was the father of philosophy, the Attic buffoon, using the Latin
word <i>Scurra</i>. He never called Chrysippus by any name but Chesippus. And
you yourself a little before, when you were numbering up a senate, as we
may call them, of philosophers, scrupled not to say that the most
eminent men talked like foolish, visionary dotards. Certainly,
therefore, if they have all erred in regard to the nature of the Gods,
it is to be feared there are no such beings. What you deliver on that
head are all whimsical notions, and not worthy the consideration even of
old women. For you do not seem to be in the least aware what a task you
draw on yourselves, if you should prevail on us to grant that the same
form is common to Gods and men. The Deity would then require the same
trouble in dressing, and the same care of the body, that mankind does.
He must walk, run, lie down, lean, sit, hold, speak, and discourse. You
need not be told the consequence of making the Gods male and female.</p>
<p>Therefore I cannot sufficiently wonder how this chief of yours came to
entertain these strange opinions. But you constantly insist on the
certainty of this tenet, that the Deity is both happy and immortal.
Supposing he is so, would his happiness be less perfect if he had not
two feet? Or cannot that blessedness or beatitude—call it which you
will (they are both harsh terms, but we must mollify them by use)—can
it not, I say, exist in that sun, or in this world, or in some eternal
mind that has not human shape or limbs? All you say against it is, that
you never saw any happiness in the sun or the world. What, then? Did you
ever see any world but this? No, you will say. Why, therefore, do you
presume to assert that there are not only six hundred thousand worlds,
but that they are innumerable? Reason tells you so. Will not reason tell
you likewise that as, in our inquiries into the most excellent nature,
we find none but the divine nature can be happy and eternal, so the same
divine nature surpasses us in
<a id="page-244"/><span class="pgnum">244</span>excellence of mind; and as in mind, so in body? Why,
therefore, as we are inferior in all other respects, should
we be equal in form? For human virtue approaches
nearer to the divinity than human form.</p>
<p>XXXV. To return to the subject I was upon. What
can be more childish than to assert that there are no such
creatures as are generated in the Red Sea or in India?
The most curious inquirer cannot arrive at the knowledge
of all those creatures which inhabit the earth, sea, fens, and
rivers; and shall we deny the existence of them because
we never saw them? That similitude which you are so
very fond of is nothing to the purpose. Is not a dog like
a wolf? And, as Ennius says,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The monkey, filthiest beast, how like to man!</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Yet they differ in nature. No beast has more sagacity
than an elephant; yet where can you find any of a larger
size? I am speaking here of beasts. But among men, do
we not see a disparity of manners in persons very much
alike, and a similitude of manners in persons unlike? If
this sort of argument were once to prevail, Velleius, observe
what it would lead to. You have laid it down as
certain that reason cannot possibly reside in any but the
human form. Another may affirm that it can exist in none
but a terrestrial being; in none but a being that is born,
that grows up, and receives instruction, and that consists
of a soul, and an infirm and perishable body; in short, in
none but a mortal man. But if you decline those opinions,
why should a single form disturb you? You perceive
that man is possessed of reason and understanding, with
all the infirmities which I have mentioned interwoven
with his being; abstracted from which, you nevertheless
know God, you say, if the lineaments do but remain.
This is not talking considerately, but at a venture; for
surely you did not think what an encumbrance anything
superfluous or useless is, not only in a man, but a tree.
How troublesome it is to have a finger too much! And
why so? Because neither use nor ornament requires
more than five; but your Deity has not only a finger more
than he wants, but a head, a neck, shoulders, sides, a
paunch, back, hams, hands, feet, thighs, and legs. Are
<a id="page-245"/><span class="pgnum">245</span>these parts necessary to immortality? Are they conducive
to the existence of the Deity? Is the face itself of
use? One would rather say so of the brain, the heart,
the lights, and the liver; for these are the seats of life.
The features of the face contribute nothing to the preservation
of it.</p>
<p>XXXVI. You censured those who, beholding those excellent
and stupendous works, the world, and its respective
parts—the heaven, the earth, the seas—and the splendor
with which they are adorned; who, contemplating the
sun, moon, and stars; and who, observing the maturity
and changes of the seasons, and vicissitudes of times, inferred
from thence that there must be some excellent and
eminent essence that originally made, and still moves, directs,
and governs them. Suppose they should mistake in
their conjecture, yet I see what they aim at. But what is
that great and noble work which appears to you to be the
effect of a divine mind, and from which you conclude that
there are Gods? “I have,” say you, “a certain information
of a Deity imprinted in my mind.” Of a bearded
Jupiter, I suppose, and a helmeted Minerva.</p>
<p>But do you really imagine them to be such? How
much better are the notions of the ignorant vulgar, who
not only believe the Deities have members like ours, but
that they make use of them; and therefore they assign
them a bow and arrows, a spear, a shield, a trident, and
lightning; and though they do not behold the actions of
the Gods, yet they cannot entertain a thought of a Deity
doing nothing. The Egyptians (so much ridiculed) held
no beasts to be sacred, except on account of some advantage
which they had received from them. The ibis, a very
large bird, with strong legs and a horny long beak, destroys
a great number of serpents. These birds keep
Egypt from pestilential diseases by killing and devouring
the flying serpents brought from the deserts of Lybia by
the south-west wind, which prevents the mischief that
may attend their biting while alive, or any infection when
dead. I could speak of the advantage of the ichneumon,
the crocodile, and the cat; but I am unwilling to be tedious;
yet I will conclude with observing that the barbarians
paid divine honors to beasts because of the benefits
<a id="page-246"/><span class="pgnum">246</span>they received from them; whereas your
Gods not only confer no benefit, but are idle, and do no single act of
any description whatever.</p>
<p>XXXVII. “They have nothing to do,” your teacher says. Epicurus truly,
like indolent boys, thinks nothing preferable to idleness; yet those
very boys, when they have a holiday, entertain themselves in some
sportive exercise. But we are to suppose the Deity in such an inactive
state that if he should move we may justly fear he would be no longer
happy. This doctrine divests the Gods of motion and operation; besides,
it encourages men to be lazy, as they are by this taught to believe that
the least labor is incompatible even with divine felicity.</p>
<p>But let it be as you would have it, that the Deity is in the form and
image of a man. Where is his abode? Where is his habitation? Where is
the place where he is to be found? What is his course of life? And what
is it that constitutes the happiness which you assert that he enjoys?
For it seems necessary that a being who is to be happy must use and
enjoy what belongs to him. And with regard to place, even those natures
which are inanimate have each their proper stations assigned to them: so
that the earth is the lowest; then water is next above the earth; the
air is above the water; and fire has the highest situation of all
allotted to it. Some creatures inhabit the earth, some the water, and
some, of an amphibious nature, live in both. There are some, also, which
are thought to be born in fire, and which often appear fluttering in
burning furnaces.</p>
<p>In the first place, therefore, I ask you, Where is the habitation of
your Deity? Secondly, What motive is it that stirs him from his place,
supposing he ever moves? And, lastly, since it is peculiar to animated
beings to have an inclination to something that is agreeable to their
several natures, what is it that the Deity affects, and to what purpose
does he exert the motion of his mind and reason? In short, how is he
happy? how eternal? Whichever of these points you touch upon, I am
afraid you will come lamely off. For there is never a proper end to
reasoning which proceeds on a false foundation; for you asserted
likewise that the form of the Deity is perceptible by the mind, but <a id="page-247"/><span class="pgnum">247</span>not
by sense; that it is neither solid, nor invariable in number; that it is
to be discerned by similitude and transition, and that a constant supply
of images is perpetually flowing on from innumerable atoms, on which our
minds are intent; so that we from that conclude that divine nature to be
happy and everlasting.</p>
<p>XXXVIII. What, in the name of those Deities concerning whom we are now
disputing, is the meaning of all this? For if they exist only in
thought, and have no solidity nor substance, what difference can there
be between thinking of a Hippocentaur and thinking of a Deity? Other
philosophers call every such conformation of the mind a vain motion; but
you term it “the approach and entrance of images into the mind.” Thus,
when I imagine that I behold T. Gracchus haranguing the people in the
Capitol, and collecting their suffrages concerning M. Octavius, I call
that a vain motion of the mind: but you affirm that the images of
Gracchus and Octavius are present, which are only conveyed to my mind
when they have arrived at the Capitol. The case is the same, you say, in
regard to the Deity, with the frequent representation of which the mind
is so affected that from thence it may be clearly understood that the
Gods<a id="FNA-98"/><a href="#FN-98" class="pginternal"><sup>98</sup></a> are happy and eternal.</p>
<p>Let it be granted that there are images by which the mind is affected,
yet it is only a certain form that occurs; and why must that form be
pronounced happy? why eternal? But what are those images you talk of,
or whence do they proceed? This loose manner of arguing is taken from
Democritus; but he is reproved by many people for it; nor can you derive
any conclusions from it: the whole system is weak and imperfect. For
what can be more improbable than that the images of Homer, Archilochus,
Romulus, Numa, Pythagoras, and Plato should come into my mind, and yet
not in the form in which they existed? How, therefore, can they be those
persons? And whose images are they? Aristotle tells us that there never
was such a person as Orpheus the poet;<a id="FNA-99"/><a href="#FN-99" class="pginternal"><sup>99</sup></a> and it is said that the verse
<a id="page-248"/><span class="pgnum">248</span>called Orphic verse was the invention of Cercops, a Pythagorean; yet
Orpheus, that is to say, the image of him, as you will have it, often
runs in my head. What is the reason that I entertain one idea of the
figure of the same person, and you another? Why do we image to ourselves
such things as never had any existence, and which never can have, such
as Scyllas and Chimæras? Why do we frame ideas of men, countries, and
cities which we never saw? How is it that the very first moment that I
choose I can form representations of them in my mind? How is it that
they come to me, even in my sleep, without being called or sought after?</p>
<p>XXXIX. The whole affair, Velleius, is ridiculous. You do not impose
images on our eyes only, but on our minds. Such is the privilege which
you have assumed of talking nonsense with impunity. But there is, you
say, a transition of images flowing on in great crowds in such a way
that out of many some one at least must be perceived! I should be
ashamed of my incapacity to understand this if you, who assert it, could
comprehend it yourselves; for how do you prove that these images are
continued in uninterrupted motion? Or, if uninterrupted, still how do
you prove them to be eternal? There is a constant supply, you say, of
innumerable atoms. But must they, for that reason, be all eternal? To
elude this, you have recourse to equilibration (for so, with your leave,
I will call your <span class="greek">Ἰσονομία</span>),<a id="FNA-100"/><a href="#FN-100" class="pginternal"><sup>100</sup></a> and say that as there is a sort of
nature mortal, so there must also be a sort which is immortal. By the
same rule, as there are men mortal, there are men immortal; and as some
arise from the earth, some must arise from the water also; and as there
are causes which destroy, there must likewise be causes which preserve.
Be it as you say; but let those causes preserve which have existence
themselves. I cannot conceive these your Gods to have any. But how does
all this face of things arise from atomic corpuscles? Were there any
such atoms (as there <a id="page-249"/><span class="pgnum">249</span>are not), they might perhaps impel one another,
and be jumbled together in their motion; but they could never be able to
impart form, or figure, or color, or animation, so that you by no means
demonstrate the immortality of your Deity.</p>
<p>XL. Let us now inquire into his happiness. It is certain that without
virtue there can be no happiness; but virtue consists in action: now
your Deity does nothing; therefore he is void of virtue, and
consequently cannot be happy. What sort of life does he lead? He has a
constant supply, you say, of good things, without any intermixture of
bad. What are those good things? Sensual pleasures, no doubt; for you
know no delight of the mind but what arises from the body, and returns
to it. I do not suppose, Velleius, that you are like some of the
Epicureans, who are ashamed of those expressions of Epicurus,<a id="FNA-101"/><a href="#FN-101" class="pginternal"><sup>101</sup></a> in
which he openly avows that he has no idea of any good separate from
wanton and obscene pleasures, which, without a blush, he names
distinctly. What food, therefore, what drink, what variety of music or
flowers, what kind of pleasures of touch, what odors, will you offer to
the Gods to fill them with pleasures? The poets indeed provide them with
banquets of nectar and ambrosia, and a Hebe or a Ganymede to serve up
the cup. But what is it, Epicurus, that you do for them? For I do not
see from whence your Deity should have those things, nor how he could
use them. Therefore the nature of man is better constituted for a happy
life than the nature of the Gods, because men enjoy various kinds of
pleasures; but you look on all those pleasures as superficial which
delight the senses only by a titillation, as Epicurus calls it. Where is
to be the end of this trifling? Even Philo, who followed the Academy,
could not bear to hear the soft and luscious delights of the Epicureans
despised; for with his admirable memory he perfectly remembered and used
to repeat many sentences of Epicurus in the very words in which they
were written. He likewise used to quote many, <a id="page-250"/><span class="pgnum">250</span>which were more gross,
from Metrodorus, the sage colleague of Epicurus, who blamed his brother
Timocrates because he would not allow that everything which had any
reference to a happy life was to be measured by the belly; nor has he
said this once only, but often. You grant what I say, I perceive; for
you know it to be true. I can produce the books, if you should deny it;
but I am not now reproving you for referring all things to the standard
of pleasure: that is another question. What I am now showing is, that
your Gods are destitute of pleasure; and therefore, according to your
own manner of reasoning, they are not happy.</p>
<p>XLI. But they are free from pain. Is that sufficient for beings who are
supposed to enjoy all good things and the most supreme felicity? The
Deity, they say, is constantly meditating on his own happiness, for he
has no other idea which can possibly occupy his mind. Consider a little;
reflect what a figure the Deity would make if he were to be idly
thinking of nothing through all eternity but “It is very well with me,
and I am happy;” nor do I see why this happy Deity should not fear being
destroyed, since, without any intermission, he is driven and agitated by
an everlasting incursion of atoms, and since images are constantly
floating off from him. Your Deity, therefore, is neither happy nor
eternal.</p>
<p>Epicurus, it seems, has written books concerning sanctity and piety
towards the Gods. But how does he speak on these subjects? You would say
that you were listening to Coruncanius or Scævola, the high-priests, and
not to a man who tore up all religion by the roots, and who overthrew
the temples and altars of the immortal Gods; not, indeed, with hands,
like Xerxes, but with arguments; for what reason is there for your
saying that men ought to worship the Gods, when the Gods not only do not
regard men, but are entirely careless of everything, and absolutely do
nothing at all?</p>
<p>But they are, you say, of so glorious and excellent a nature that a wise
man is induced by their excellence to adore them. Can there be any glory
or excellence in that nature which only contemplates its own happiness,
and neither will do, nor does, nor ever did anything? Besides, <a id="page-251"/><span class="pgnum">251</span>what
piety is due to a being from whom you receive nothing? Or how can you,
or any one else, be indebted to him who bestows no benefits? For piety
is only justice towards the Gods; but what right have they to it, when
there is no communication whatever between the Gods and men? And
sanctity is the knowledge of how we ought to worship them; but I do not
understand why they are to be worshipped, if we are neither to receive
nor expect any good from them.</p>
<p>XLII. And why should we worship them from an admiration only of that
nature in which we can behold nothing excellent? and as for that freedom
from superstition, which you are in the habit of boasting of so much, it
is easy to be free from that feeling when you have renounced all belief
in the power of the Gods; unless, indeed, you imagine that Diagoras or
Theodorus, who absolutely denied the being of the Gods, could possibly
be superstitious. I do not suppose that even Protagoras could, who
doubted whether there were Gods or not. The opinions of these
philosophers are not only destructive of superstition, which arises from
a vain fear of the Gods, but of religion also, which consists in a pious
adoration of them.</p>
<p>What think you of those who have asserted that the whole doctrine
concerning the immortal Gods was the invention of politicians, whose
view was to govern that part of the community by religion which reason
could not influence? Are not their opinions subversive of all religion?
Or what religion did Prodicus the Chian leave to men, who held that
everything beneficial to human life should be numbered among the Gods?
Were not they likewise void of religion who taught that the Deities, at
present the object of our prayers and adoration, were valiant,
illustrious, and mighty men who arose to divinity after death?
Euhemerus, whom our Ennius translated, and followed more than other
authors, has particularly advanced this doctrine, and treated of the
deaths and burials of the Gods; can he, then, be said to have confirmed
religion, or, rather, to have totally subverted it? I shall say nothing
of that sacred and august Eleusina, into whose mysteries the most
distant nations were initiated, <a id="page-252"/><span class="pgnum">252</span>nor of the solemnities in Samothrace,
or in Lemnos, secretly resorted to by night, and surrounded by thick and
shady groves; which, if they were properly explained, and reduced to
reasonable principles, would rather explain the nature of things than
discover the knowledge of the Gods.</p>
<p>XLIII. Even that great man Democritus, from whose fountains Epicurus
watered his little garden, seems to me to be very inferior to his usual
acuteness when speaking about the nature of the Gods. For at one time he
thinks that there are images endowed with divinity, inherent in the
universality of things; at another, that the principles and minds
contained in the universe are Gods; then he attributes divinity to
animated images, employing themselves in doing us good or harm; and,
lastly, he speaks of certain images of such vast extent that they
encompass the whole outside of the universe; all which opinions are more
worthy of the country<a id="FNA-102"/><a href="#FN-102" class="pginternal"><sup>102</sup></a> of Democritus than of Democritus himself; for
who can frame in his mind any ideas of such images? who can admire them?
who can think they merit a religious adoration?</p>
<p>But Epicurus, when he divests the Gods of the power of doing good,
extirpates all religion from the minds of men; for though he says the
divine nature is the best and the most excellent of all natures, he will
not allow it to be susceptible of any benevolence, by which he destroys
the chief and peculiar attribute of the most perfect being. For what is
better and more excellent than goodness and beneficence? To refuse your
Gods that quality is to say that no man is any object of their favor,
and no Gods either; that they neither love nor esteem any one; in short,
that they not only give themselves no trouble about us, but even look on
each other with the greatest indifference.</p>
<p>XLIV. How much more reasonable is the doctrine of the Stoics, whom you
censure? It is one of their maxims that the wise are friends to the
wise, though unknown to each other; for as nothing is more amiable than
virtue, he who possesses it is worthy our love, to whatever country <a id="page-253"/><span class="pgnum">253</span>he
belongs. But what evils do your principles bring, when you make good
actions and benevolence the marks of imbecility! For, not to mention the
power and nature of the Gods, you hold that even men, if they had no
need of mutual assistance, would be neither courteous nor beneficent. Is
there no natural charity in the dispositions of good men? The very name
of love, from which friendship is derived, is dear to men;<a id="FNA-103"/><a href="#FN-103" class="pginternal"><sup>103</sup></a> and if
friendship is to centre in our own advantage only, without regard to him
whom we esteem a friend, it cannot be called friendship, but a sort of
traffic for our own profit. Pastures, lands, and herds of cattle are
valued in the same manner on account of the profit we gather from them;
but charity and friendship expect no return. How much more reason have
we to think that the Gods, who want nothing, should love each other, and
employ themselves about us! If it were not so, why should we pray to or
adore them? Why do the priests preside over the altars, and the augurs
over the auspices? What have we to ask of the Gods, and why do we prefer
our vows to them?</p>
<p>But Epicurus, you say, has written a book concerning sanctity. A
trifling performance by a man whose wit is not so remarkable in it, as
the unrestrained license of writing which he has permitted himself; for
what sanctity can there be if the Gods take no care of human affairs? Or
how can that nature be called animated which neither regards nor
performs anything? Therefore our friend Posidonius has well observed, in
his fifth book of the Nature of the Gods, that Epicurus believed there
were no Gods, and that what he had said about the immortal Gods was only
said from a desire to avoid unpopularity. He could not be so weak as to
imagine that the Deity has only the outward features of a simple mortal,
without any real solidity; that he has all the members of a man, without
the least power to use them—a certain unsubstantial pellucid being,
neither favorable nor beneficial to any one, neither regarding nor doing
anything. There can be no such being in nature; and as Epicurus said
this plainly, he allows <a id="page-254"/><span class="pgnum">254</span>the Gods in words, and destroys them in fact;
and if the Deity is truly such a being that he shows no favor, no
benevolence to mankind, away with him! For why should I entreat him to
be propitious? He can be propitious to none, since, as you say, all his
favor and benevolence are the effects of imbecility.</p>
<hr/>
<h3>BOOK II.</h3>
<p>I. <span class="first">When</span> Cotta had thus concluded, Velleius replied: I certainly was
inconsiderate to engage in argument with an Academician who is likewise
a rhetorician. I should not have feared an Academician without
eloquence, nor a rhetorician without that philosophy, however eloquent
he might be; for I am never puzzled by an empty flow of words, nor by
the most subtle reasonings delivered without any grace of oratory. But
you, Cotta, have excelled in both. You only wanted the assembly and the
judges. However, enough of this at present. Now, let us hear what
Lucilius has to say, if it is agreeable to him.</p>
<p>I had much rather, says Balbus, hear Cotta resume his discourse, and
demonstrate the true Gods with the same eloquence which he made use of
to explode the false; for, on such a subject, the loose, unsettled
doctrine of the Academy does not become a philosopher, a priest, a
Cotta, whose opinions should be, like those we hold, firm and certain.
Epicurus has been more than sufficiently refuted; but I would willingly
hear your own sentiments, Cotta.</p>
<p>Do you forget, replies Cotta, what I at first said—that it is easier
for me, especially on this point, to explain what opinions those are
which I do not hold, rather than what those are which I do? Nay, even if
I did feel some certainty on any particular point, yet, after having
been so diffuse myself already, I would prefer now hearing you speak in
your turn. I submit, says Balbus, and will be as brief as I possibly
can; for as you have confuted the errors of Epicurus, my part in the
dispute will be the shorter. <a id="page-255"/><span class="pgnum">255</span>Our sect divide the whole question
concerning the immortal Gods into four parts. First, they prove that
there are Gods; secondly, of what character and nature they are;
thirdly, that the universe is governed by them; and, lastly, that they
exercise a superintendence over human affairs. But in this present
discussion let us confine ourselves to the first two articles, and defer
the third and fourth till another opportunity, as they require more time
to discuss. By no means, says Cotta, for we have time enough on our
hands; besides that, we are now discussing a subject which should be
preferred even to serious business.</p>
<p>II. The first point, then, says Lucilius, I think needs no discourse to
prove it; for what can be so plain and evident, when we behold the
heavens and contemplate the celestial bodies, as the existence of some
supreme, divine intelligence, by which all these things are governed?
Were it otherwise, Ennius would not, with a universal approbation, have
said,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Look up to the refulgent heaven above,</p>
<p>Which all men call, unanimously, Jove.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">This is Jupiter, the governor of the world, who rules all things with
his nod, and is, as the same Ennius adds,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>——of Gods and men the sire,<a id="FNA-104"/><a href="#FN-104" class="pginternal"><sup>104</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">an omnipresent and omnipotent God. And if any one doubts this, I really
do not understand why the same man may not also doubt whether there is a
sun or not. For what can possibly be more evident than this? And if it
were not a truth universally impressed on the minds of men, the belief
in it would never have been so firm; nor would it have been, as it is,
increased by length of years, nor would it have gathered strength and
stability through every age. And, in truth, we see that other opinions,
being false and groundless, have already fallen into oblivion by lapse
of time. Who now believes in Hippocentaurs and <a id="page-256"/><span class="pgnum">256</span>Chimæras? Or what old
woman is now to be found so weak and ignorant as to stand in fear of
those infernal monsters which once so terrified mankind? For time
destroys the fictions of error and opinion, while it confirms the
determinations of nature and of truth. And therefore it is that, both
among us and among other nations, sacred institutions and the divine
worship of the Gods have been strengthened and improved from time to
time. And this is not to be imputed to chance or folly, but to the
frequent appearance of the Gods themselves. In the war with the Latins,
when A. Posthumius, the dictator, attacked Octavius Mamilius, the
Tusculan, at Regillus, Castor and Pollux were seen fighting in our army
on horseback; and since that the same offspring of Tyndarus gave notice
of the defeat of Perses; for as P. Vatienus, the grandfather of the
present young man of that name, was coming in the night to Rome from his
government of Reate, two young men on white horses appeared to him, and
told him that King<a id="FNA-105"/><a href="#FN-105" class="pginternal"><sup>105</sup></a> Perses was that day taken prisoner. This news he
carried to the senate, who immediately threw him into prison for
speaking inconsiderately on a state affair; but when it was confirmed by
letters from Paullus, he was recompensed by the senate with land and
immunities.<a id="FNA-106"/><a href="#FN-106" class="pginternal"><sup>106</sup></a> Nor do we forget when the Locrians defeated the people
of Crotone, in a great battle on the banks of the river Sagra, that it
was known the same day at the Olympic Games. The voices of the Fauns
have been often heard, and Deities have appeared in forms so visible
that they have compelled every one who is not senseless, or hardened in
impiety, to confess the presence of the Gods.</p>
<p>III. What do predictions and foreknowledge of future events indicate,
but that such future events are shown, pointed out, portended, and
foretold to men? From whence they are called omens, signs, portents,
prodigies. But though we should esteem fabulous what is said of
<a id="page-257"/><span class="pgnum">257</span>Mopsus,<a id="FNA-107"/><a href="#FN-107" class="pginternal"><sup>107</sup></a> Tiresias,<a id="FNA-108"/><a href="#FN-108" class="pginternal"><sup>108</sup></a> Amphiaraus,<a id="FNA-109"/><a href="#FN-109" class="pginternal"><sup>109</sup></a> Calchas,<a id="FNA-110"/><a href="#FN-110" class="pginternal"><sup>110</sup></a> and
Helenus<a id="FNA-111"/><a href="#FN-111" class="pginternal"><sup>111</sup></a> (who would not have been delivered down to us as augurs
even in fable if their art had been despised), may we not be
sufficiently apprised of the power of the Gods by domestic examples?
Will not the temerity of P. Claudius, in the first Punic war, affect us?
who, when the poultry were let out of the coop and would not feed,
ordered them to be thrown into the water, and, joking even upon the
Gods, said, with a sneer, “Let them drink, since they will not eat;”
which piece of ridicule, being followed by a victory over his fleet,
cost him many tears, and brought great calamity on the Roman people. Did
not his colleague Junius, in the same war, lose his fleet in a tempest
by disregarding the auspices? Claudius, therefore, was condemned by the
people, and Junius killed himself. Cœlius says that P. Flaminius, from
his neglect of religion, fell at Thrasimenus; a loss which the public
severely felt. By these instances of calamity we may be assured that
Rome owes her grandeur and success to the conduct of those who were
tenacious of their religious duties; and if we compare ourselves to our
neighbors, we shall find that we are infinitely distinguished above
foreign nations by our zeal for religious ceremonies, though in other
things we may be only equal to them, and in other respects even inferior
to them.</p>
<p>Ought we to contemn Attius Navius’s staff, with which <a id="page-258"/><span class="pgnum">258</span>he divided the
regions of the vine to find his sow?<a id="FNA-112"/><a href="#FN-112" class="pginternal"><sup>112</sup></a> I should despise it, if I were
not aware that King Hostilius had carried on most important wars in
deference to his auguries; but by the negligence of our nobility the
discipline of the augury is now omitted, the truth of the auspices
despised, and only a mere form observed; so that the most important
affairs of the commonwealth, even the wars, on which the public safety
depends, are conducted without any auspices; the Peremnia<a id="FNA-113"/><a href="#FN-113" class="pginternal"><sup>113</sup></a> are
discussed; no part of the Acumina<a id="FNA-114"/><a href="#FN-114" class="pginternal"><sup>114</sup></a> performed; no select men are
called to witness to the military testaments;<a id="FNA-115"/><a href="#FN-115" class="pginternal"><sup>115</sup></a> our generals now
begin their wars as soon as they have arranged the Auspicia. The force
of religion was so great among our ancestors that some of their
commanders have, with their faces veiled, and with the solemn, formal
expressions of religion, sacrificed themselves to the immortal Gods to
save their country.<a id="FNA-116"/><a href="#FN-116" class="pginternal"><sup>116</sup></a> I could mention many of the Sibylline
prophecies, and many answers of the haruspices, to confirm those things,
which ought not to be doubted.</p>
<p>IV. For example: our augurs and the Etrurian haruspices saw the truth of
their art established when P. Scipio and C. Figulus were consuls; for as
Tiberius Gracchus, who was a second time consul, wished to proceed to a
<a id="page-259"/><span class="pgnum">259</span>fresh election, the first Rogator,<a id="FNA-117"/><a href="#FN-117" class="pginternal"><sup>117</sup></a> as he was collecting the
suffrages, fell down dead on the spot. Gracchus nevertheless went on
with the assembly, but perceiving that this accident had a religious
influence on the people, he brought the affair before the senate. The
senate thought fit to refer it to those who usually took cognizance of
such things. The haruspices were called, and declared that the man who
had acted as Rogator of the assembly had no right to do so; to which, as
I have heard my father say, he replied with great warmth, Have I no
right, who am consul, and augur, and favored by the Auspicia? And shall
you, who are Tuscans and Barbarians, pretend that you have authority
over the Roman Auspicia, and a right to give judgment in matters
respecting the formality of our assemblies? Therefore, he then commanded
them to withdraw; but not long afterward he wrote from his province<a id="FNA-118"/><a href="#FN-118" class="pginternal"><sup>118</sup></a>
to the college of augurs, acknowledging that in reading the books<a id="FNA-119"/><a href="#FN-119" class="pginternal"><sup>119</sup></a>
he remembered that he had illegally chosen a place for his tent in the
gardens of Scipio, and had afterward entered the Pomœrium, in order to
hold a senate, but that in repassing the same Pomœrium he had forgotten
to take the auspices; and that, therefore, the consuls had been created
informally. The augurs laid the case before the senate. The senate
decreed that they should resign their charge, and so they accordingly
abdicated. What greater example need we seek for? The wisest, perhaps
the most excellent of men, chose to confess his fault, which he might
have concealed, rather than leave the public the least atom of religious
guilt; and the consuls chose to quit the highest office in the State,
rather than fill it for a moment in defiance of religion. How great is
the reputation of the augurs!</p>
<p>And is not the art of the soothsayers divine? And must not every one who
sees what innumerable instances of the same kind there are confess the
existence of the <a id="page-260"/><span class="pgnum">260</span>Gods? For they who have interpreters must certainly
exist themselves; now, there are interpreters of the Gods; therefore we
must allow there are Gods. But it may be said, perhaps, that all
predictions are not accomplished. We may as well conclude there is no
art of physic, because all sick persons do not recover. The Gods show us
signs of future events; if we are occasionally deceived in the results,
it is not to be imputed to the nature of the Gods, but to the
conjectures of men. All nations agree that there are Gods; the opinion
is innate, and, as it were, engraved in the minds of all men. The only
point in dispute among us is, what they are.</p>
<p>V. Their existence no one denies. Cleanthes, one of our sect, imputes
the way in which the idea of the Gods is implanted in the minds of men
to four causes. The first is that which I just now mentioned—the
foreknowledge of future things. The second is the great advantages which
we enjoy from the temperature of the air, the fertility of the earth,
and the abundance of various benefits of other kinds. The third cause is
deduced from the terror with which the mind is affected by thunder,
tempests, storms, snow, hail, devastation, pestilence, earthquakes often
attended with hideous noises, showers of stones, and rain like drops of
blood; by rocks and sudden openings of the earth; by monstrous births of
men and beasts; by meteors in the air, and blazing stars, by the Greeks
called <i>cometæ</i>, by us <i>crinitæ</i>, the appearance of which, in the late
Octavian war,<a id="FNA-120"/><a href="#FN-120" class="pginternal"><sup>120</sup></a> were foreboders of great calamities; by two suns,
which, as I have heard my father say, happened in the consulate of
Tuditanus and Aquillius, and in which year also another sun (P.
Africanus) was extinguished. These things terrified mankind, and raised
in them a firm belief of the existence of some celestial and divine
power.</p>
<p>His fourth cause, and that the strongest, is drawn from the regularity
of the motion and revolution of the heavens, the distinctness, variety,
beauty, and order of the sun, moon, and all the stars, the appearance
only of which is sufficient to convince us they are not the effects of
chance; as when we enter into a house, or school, or court, and observe
the exact order, discipline, and method of it, we cannot suppose <a id="page-261"/><span class="pgnum">261</span>that
it is so regulated without a cause, but must conclude that there is some
one who commands, and to whom obedience is paid. It is quite impossible
for us to avoid thinking that the wonderful motions, revolutions, and
order of those many and great bodies, no part of which is impaired by
the countless and infinite succession of ages, must be governed and
directed by some supreme intelligent being.</p>
<p>VI. Chrysippus, indeed, had a very penetrating genius; yet such is the
doctrine which he delivers, that he seems rather to have been instructed
by nature than to owe it to any discovery of his own. “If,” says he,
“there is anything in the universe which no human reason, ability, or
power can make, the being who produced it must certainly be preferable
to man. Now, celestial bodies, and all those things which proceed in any
eternal order, cannot be made by man; the being who made them is
therefore preferable to man. What, then, is that being but a God? If
there be no such thing as a Deity, what is there better than man, since
he only is possessed of reason, the most excellent of all things? But it
is a foolish piece of vanity in man to think there is nothing preferable
to him. There is, therefore, something preferable; consequently, there
is certainly a God.”</p>
<p>When you behold a large and beautiful house, surely no one can persuade
you it was built for mice and weasels, though you do not see the master;
and would it not, therefore, be most manifest folly to imagine that a
world so magnificently adorned, with such an immense variety of
celestial bodies of such exquisite beauty, and that the vast sizes and
magnitude of the sea and land were intended as the abode of man, and not
as the mansion of the immortal Gods? Do we not also plainly see this,
that all the most elevated regions are the best, and that the earth is
the lowest region, and is surrounded with the grossest air? so that as
we perceive that in some cities and countries the capacities of men are
naturally duller, from the thickness of the climate, so mankind in
general are affected by the heaviness of the air which surrounds the
earth, the grossest region of the world.</p>
<p>Yet even from this inferior intelligence of man we may <a id="page-262"/><span class="pgnum">262</span>discover the
existence of some intelligent agent that is divine, and wiser than
ourselves; for, as Socrates says in Xenophon, from whence had man his
portion of understanding? And, indeed, if any one were to push his
inquiries about the moisture and heat which is diffused through the
human body, and the earthy kind of solidity existing in our entrails,
and that soul by which we breathe, and to ask whence we derived them, it
would be plain that we have received one thing from the earth, another
from liquid, another from fire, and another from that air which we
inhale every time that we breathe.</p>
<p>VII. But where did we find that which excels all these things—I mean
reason, or (if you please, in other terms) the mind, understanding,
thought, prudence; and from whence did we receive it? Shall the world be
possessed of every other perfection, and be destitute of this one, which
is the most important and valuable of all? But certainly there is
nothing better, or more excellent, or more beautiful than the world; and
not only there is nothing better, but we cannot even conceive anything
superior to it; and if reason and wisdom are the greatest of all
perfections, they must necessarily be a part of what we all allow to be
the most excellent.</p>
<p>Who is not compelled to admit the truth of what I assert by that
agreeable, uniform, and continued agreement of things in the universe?
Could the earth at one season be adorned with flowers, at another be
covered with snow? Or, if such a number of things regulated their own
changes, could the approach and retreat of the sun in the summer and
winter solstices be so regularly known and calculated? Could the flux
and reflux of the sea and the height of the tides be affected by the
increase or wane of the moon? Could the different courses of the stars
be preserved by the uniform movement of the whole heaven? Could these
things subsist, I say, in such a harmony of all the parts of the
universe without the continued influence of a divine spirit?</p>
<p>If these points are handled in a free and copious manner, as I purpose
to do, they will be less liable to the cavils of the Academics; but the
narrow, confined way in which Zeno reasoned upon them laid them more
open to <a id="page-263"/><span class="pgnum">263</span>objection; for as running streams are seldom or never tainted,
while standing waters easily grow corrupt, so a fluency of expression
washes away the censures of the caviller, while the narrow limits of a
discourse which is too concise is almost defenceless; for the arguments
which I am enlarging upon are thus briefly laid down by Zeno:</p>
<p>VIII. “That which reasons is superior to that which does not; nothing is
superior to the world; the world, therefore, reasons.” By the same rule
the world may be proved to be wise, happy, and eternal; for the
possession of all these qualities is superior to the want of them; and
nothing is superior to the world; the inevitable consequence of which
argument is, that the world, therefore, is a Deity. He goes on: “No part
of anything void of sense is capable of perception; some parts of the
world have perception; the world, therefore, has sense.” He proceeds,
and pursues the argument closely. “Nothing,” says he, “that is destitute
itself of life and reason can generate a being possessed of life and
reason; but the world does generate beings possessed of life and reason;
the world, therefore, is not itself destitute of life and reason.”</p>
<p>He concludes his argument in his usual manner with a simile: “If
well-tuned pipes should spring out of the olive, would you have the
slightest doubt that there was in the olive-tree itself some kind of
skill and knowledge? Or if the plane-tree could produce harmonious
lutes, surely you would infer, on the same principle, that music was
contained in the plane-tree. Why, then, should we not believe the world
is a living and wise being, since it produces living and wise beings out
of itself?”</p>
<p>IX. But as I have been insensibly led into a length of discourse beyond
my first design (for I said that, as the existence of the Gods was
evident to all, there was no need of any long oration to prove it), I
will demonstrate it by reasons deduced from the nature of things. For it
is a fact that all beings which take nourishment and increase contain in
themselves a power of natural heat, without which they could neither be
nourished nor increase. For everything which is of a warm and fiery
character is agitated and stirred up by its own motion. But that which
is nourished and grows is influenced by a certain regular <a id="page-264"/><span class="pgnum">264</span>and equable
motion. And as long as this motion remains in us, so long does sense and
life remain; but the moment that it abates and is extinguished, we
ourselves decay and perish.</p>
<p>By arguments like these, Cleanthes shows how great is the power of heat
in all bodies. He observes that there is no food so gross as not to be
digested in a night and a day; and that even in the excrementitious
parts, which nature rejects, there remains a heat. The veins and
arteries seem, by their continual quivering, to resemble the agitation
of fire; and it has often been observed when the heart of an animal is
just plucked from the body that it palpitates with such visible motion
as to resemble the rapidity of fire. Everything, therefore, that has
life, whether it be animal or vegetable, owes that life to the heat
inherent in it; it is this nature of heat which contains in itself the
vital power which extends throughout the whole world. This will appear
more clearly on a more close explanation of this fiery quality, which
pervades all things.</p>
<p>Every division, then, of the world (and I shall touch upon the most
considerable) is sustained by heat; and first it may be observed in
earthly substances that fire is produced from stones by striking or
rubbing one against another; that “the warm earth smokes”<a id="FNA-121"/><a href="#FN-121" class="pginternal"><sup>121</sup></a> when just
turned up, and that water is drawn warm from well-springs; and this is
most especially the case in the winter season, because there is a great
quantity of heat contained in the caverns of the earth; and this becomes
more dense in the winter, and on that account confines more closely the
innate heat which is discoverable in the earth.</p>
<p>X. It would require a long dissertation, and many reasons would require
to be adduced, to show that all the seeds which the earth conceives, and
all those which it contains having been generated from itself, and fixed
in roots and trunks, derive all their origin and increase from the
temperature and regulation of heat. And that even every liquor has a
mixture of heat in it is plainly demonstrated by the effusion of water;
for it would not congeal by cold, nor become solid, as ice or snow, and
return again <a id="page-265"/><span class="pgnum">265</span>to its natural state, if it were not that, when heat is
applied to it, it again becomes liquefied and dissolved, and so diffuses
itself. Therefore, by northern and other cold winds it is frozen and
hardened, and in turn it dissolves and melts again by heat. The seas
likewise, we find, when agitated by winds, grow warm, so that from this
fact we may understand that there is heat included in that vast body of
water; for we cannot imagine it to be external and adventitious heat,
but such as is stirred up by agitation from the deep recesses of the
seas; and the same thing takes place with respect to our bodies, which
grow warm with motion and exercise.</p>
<p>And the very air itself, which indeed is the coldest element, is by no
means void of heat; for there is a great quantity, arising from the
exhalations of water, which appears to be a sort of steam occasioned by
its internal heat, like that of boiling liquors. The fourth part of the
universe is entirely fire, and is the source of the salutary and vital
heat which is found in the rest. From hence we may conclude that, as all
parts of the world are sustained by heat, the world itself also has such
a great length of time subsisted from the same cause; and so much the
more, because we ought to understand that that hot and fiery principle
is so diffused over universal nature that there is contained in it a
power and cause of generation and procreation, from which all animate
beings, and all those creatures of the vegetable world, the roots of
which are contained in the earth, must inevitably derive their origin
and their increase.</p>
<p>XI. It is nature, consequently, that continues and preserves the world,
and that, too, a nature which is not destitute of sense and reason; for
in every essence that is not simple, but composed of several parts,
there must be some predominant quality—as, for instance, the mind in
man, and in beasts something resembling it, from which arise all the
appetites and desires for anything. As for trees, and all the vegetable
produce of the earth, it is thought to be in their roots. I call that
the predominant quality,<a id="FNA-122"/><a href="#FN-122" class="pginternal"><sup>122</sup></a> which <a id="page-266"/><span class="pgnum">266</span>the Greeks call <span class="greek">ἡγεμονικόν</span>; which
must and ought to be the most excellent quality, wherever it is found.
That, therefore, in which the prevailing quality of all nature resides
must be the most excellent of all things, and most worthy of the power
and pre-eminence over all things.</p>
<p>Now, we see that there is nothing in being that is not a part of the
universe; and as there are sense and reason in the parts of it, there
must therefore be these qualities, and these, too, in a more energetic
and powerful degree, in that part in which the predominant quality of
the world is found. The world, therefore, must necessarily be possessed
of wisdom; and that element, which embraces all things, must excel in
perfection of reason. The world, therefore, is a God, and the whole
power of the world is contained in that divine element.</p>
<p>The heat also of the world is more pure, clear, and lively, and,
consequently, better adapted to move the senses than the heat allotted
to us; and it vivifies and preserves all things within the compass of
our knowledge.</p>
<p>It is absurd, therefore, to say that the world, which is endued with a
perfect, free, pure, spirituous, and active heat, is not sensitive,
since by this heat men and beasts are preserved, and move, and think;
more especially since this heat of the world is itself the sole
principle of agitation, and has no external impulse, but is moved
spontaneously; for what can be more powerful than the world, which moves
and raises that heat by which it subsists?</p>
<p>XII. For let us listen to Plato, who is regarded as a God among
philosophers. He says that there are two sorts of motion, one innate and
the other external; and that that which is moved spontaneously is more
divine than that which is moved by another power. This self-motion he
places in the mind alone, and concludes that the first principle of
motion is derived from the mind. Therefore, since all motion arises from
the heat of the world, and that heat is not moved by the effect of any
external impulse, but of its own accord, it must necessarily be a mind;
from whence it follows that the world is animated.</p>
<p>On such reasoning is founded this opinion, that the world is possessed
of understanding, because it certainly has more perfections in itself
than any other nature; for <a id="page-267"/><span class="pgnum">267</span>as there is no part of our bodies so
considerable as the whole of us, so it is clear that there is no
particular portion of the universe equal in magnitude to the whole of
it; from whence it follows that wisdom must be an attribute of the
world; otherwise man, who is a part of it, and possessed of reason,
would be superior to the entire world.</p>
<p>And thus, if we proceed from the first rude, unfinished natures to the
most superior and perfect ones, we shall inevitably come at last to the
nature of the Gods. For, in the first place, we observe that those
vegetables which are produced out of the earth are supported by nature,
and she gives them no further supply than is sufficient to preserve them
by nourishing them and making them grow. To beasts she has given sense
and motion, and a faculty which directs them to what is wholesome, and
prompts them to shun what is noxious to them. On man she has conferred a
greater portion of her favor; inasmuch as she has added reason, by which
he is enabled to command his passions, to moderate some, and to subdue
others.</p>
<p>XIII. In the fourth and highest degree are those beings which are
naturally wise and good, who from the first moment of their existence
are possessed of right and consistent reason, which we must consider
superior to man and deserving to be attributed to a God; that is to say,
to the world, in which it is inevitable that that perfect and complete
reason should be inherent. Nor is it possible that it should be said
with justice that there is any arrangement of things in which there
cannot be something entire and perfect. For as in a vine or in beasts we
see that nature, if not prevented by some superior violence, proceeds by
her own appropriate path to her destined end; and as in painting,
architecture, and the other arts there is a point of perfection which is
attainable, and occasionally attained, so it is even much more necessary
that in universal nature there must be some complete and perfect result
arrived at. Many external accidents may happen to all other natures
which may impede their progress to perfection, but nothing can hinder
universal nature, because she is herself the ruler and governor of all
other natures. That, therefore, must be the fourth and most elevated
degree to which no other power can approach.</p>
<p><a id="page-268"/><span class="pgnum">268</span>But this degree is that on which the nature of all things is placed;
and since she is possessed of this, and she presides over all things,
and is subject to no possible impediment, the world must necessarily be
an intelligent and even a wise being. But how marvellously great is the
ignorance of those men who dispute the perfection of that nature which
encircles all things; or who, allowing it to be infinitely perfect, yet
deny it to be, in the first place, animated, then reasonable, and,
lastly, prudent and wise! For how without these qualities could it be
infinitely perfect? If it were like vegetables, or even like beasts,
there would be no more reason for thinking it extremely good than
extremely bad; and if it were possessed of reason, and had not wisdom
from the beginning, the world would be in a worse condition than man;
for man may grow wise, but the world, if it were destitute of wisdom
through an infinite space of time past, could never acquire it. Thus it
would be worse than man. But as that is absurd to imagine, the world
must be esteemed wise from all eternity, and consequently a Deity: since
there is nothing existing that is not defective, except the universe,
which is well provided, and fully complete and perfect in all its
numbers and parts.</p>
<p>XIV. For Chrysippus says, very acutely, that as the case is made for the
buckler, and the scabbard for the sword, so all things, except the
universe, were made for the sake of something else. As, for instance,
all those crops and fruits which the earth produces were made for the
sake of animals, and animals for man; as, the horse for carrying, the ox
for the plough, the dog for hunting and for a guard. But man himself was
born to contemplate and imitate the world, being in no wise perfect,
but, if I may so express myself, a particle of perfection; but the
world, as it comprehends all, and as nothing exists that is not
contained in it, is entirely perfect. In what, therefore, can it be
defective, since it is perfect? It cannot want understanding and reason,
for they are the most desirable of all qualities. The same Chrysippus
observes also, by the use of similitudes, that everything in its kind,
when arrived at maturity and perfection, is superior to that which is
not—as, a horse to a colt, a dog to a puppy, and a man to a boy—so
whatever <a id="page-269"/><span class="pgnum">269</span>is best in the whole universe must exist in some complete and
perfect being. But nothing is more perfect than the world, and nothing
better than virtue. Virtue, therefore, is an attribute of the world. But
human nature is not perfect, and nevertheless virtue is produced in it:
with how much greater reason, then, do we conceive it to be inherent in
the world! Therefore the world has virtue, and it is also wise, and
consequently a Deity.</p>
<p>XV. The divinity of the world being now clearly perceived, we must
acknowledge the same divinity to be likewise in the stars, which are
formed from the lightest and purest part of the ether, without a mixture
of any other matter; and, being altogether hot and transparent, we may
justly say they have life, sense, and understanding. And Cleanthes
thinks that it may be established by the evidence of two of our
senses—feeling and seeing—that they are entirely fiery bodies; for the
heat and brightness of the sun far exceed any other fire, inasmuch as it
enlightens the whole universe, covering such a vast extent of space, and
its power is such that we perceive that it not only warms, but often
even burns: neither of which it could do if it were not of a fiery
quality. Since, then, says he, the sun is a fiery body, and is nourished
by the vapors of the ocean (for no fire can continue without some
sustenance), it must be either like that fire which we use to warm us
and dress our food, or like that which is contained in the bodies of
animals.</p>
<p>And this fire, which the convenience of life requires, is the devourer
and consumer of everything, and throws into confusion and destroys
whatever it reaches. On the contrary, the corporeal heat is full of
life, and salutary; and vivifies, preserves, cherishes, increases, and
sustains all things, and is productive of sense; therefore, says he,
there can be no doubt which of these fires the sun is like, since it
causes all things in their respective kinds to flourish and arrive to
maturity; and as the fire of the sun is like that which is contained in
the bodies of animated beings, the sun itself must likewise be animated,
and so must the other stars also, which arise out of the celestial ardor
that we call the sky, or firmament.</p>
<p>As, then, some animals are generated in the earth, some <a id="page-270"/><span class="pgnum">270</span>in the water,
and some in the air, Aristotle<a id="FNA-123"/><a href="#FN-123" class="pginternal"><sup>123</sup></a> thinks it ridiculous to imagine that
no animal is formed in that part of the universe which is the most
capable to produce them. But the stars are situated in the ethereal
space; and as this is an element the most subtle, whose motion is
continual, and whose force does not decay, it follows, of necessity,
that every animated being which is produced in it must be endowed with
the quickest sense and the swiftest motion. The stars, therefore, being
there generated, it is a natural inference to suppose them endued with
such a degree of sense and understanding as places them in the rank of
Gods.</p>
<p>XVI. For it may be observed that they who inhabit countries of a pure,
clear air have a quicker apprehension and a readier genius than those
who live in a thick, foggy climate. It is thought likewise that the
nature of a man’s diet has an effect on the mind; therefore it is
probable that the stars are possessed of an excellent understanding,
inasmuch as they are situated in the ethereal part of the universe, and
are nourished by the vapors of the earth and sea, which are purified by
their long passage to the heavens. But the invariable order and regular
motion of the stars plainly manifest their sense and understanding; for
all motion which seems to be conducted with reason and harmony supposes
an intelligent principle, that does not act blindly, or inconsistently,
or at random. And this regularity and consistent course of the stars
from all eternity indicates not any natural order, for it is pregnant
with sound reason, not fortune (for fortune, being a friend to change,
despises consistency). It follows, therefore, that they move
spontaneously by their own sense and divinity.</p>
<p>Aristotle also deserves high commendation for his observation that
everything that moves is either put in motion by natural impulse, or by
some external force, or of its own accord; and that the sun, and moon,
and all the stars move; but that those things which are moved by natural
impulse are either borne downward by their weight, or upward by their
lightness; neither of which things could be the case with the stars,
because they move in a regular circle and orbit. Nor can it be said that
<a id="page-271"/><span class="pgnum">271</span>there is some superior force which causes the stars to be moved in a
manner contrary to nature. For what superior force can there be? It
follows, therefore, that their motion must be voluntary. And whoever is
convinced of this must discover not only great ignorance, but great
impiety likewise, if he denies the existence of the Gods; nor is the
difference great whether a man denies their existence, or deprives them
of all design and action; for whatever is wholly inactive seems to me
not to exist at all. Their existence, therefore, appears so plain that I
can scarcely think that man in his senses who denies it.</p>
<p>XVII. It now remains that we consider what is the character of the Gods.
Nothing is more difficult than to divert our thoughts and judgment from
the information of our corporeal sight, and the view of objects which
our eyes are accustomed to; and it is this difficulty which has had such
an influence on the unlearned, and on philosophers<a id="FNA-124"/><a href="#FN-124" class="pginternal"><sup>124</sup></a> also who
resembled the unlearned multitude, that they have been unable to form
any idea of the immortal Gods except under the clothing of the human
figure; the weakness of which opinion Cotta has so well confuted that I
need not add my thoughts upon it. But as the previous idea which we have
of the Deity comprehends two things—first of all, that he is an
animated being; secondly, that there is nothing in all nature superior
to him—I do not see what can be more consistent with this idea and
preconception than to attribute a mind and divinity to the world,<a id="FNA-125"/><a href="#FN-125" class="pginternal"><sup>125</sup></a>
the most excellent of all beings.</p>
<p>Epicurus may be as merry with this notion as he pleases; a man not the
best qualified for a joker, as not having the wit and sense of his
country.<a id="FNA-126"/><a href="#FN-126" class="pginternal"><sup>126</sup></a> Let him say that a voluble round Deity is to him
incomprehensible; yet he shall never dissuade me from a principle which
he himself approves, for he is of opinion there are Gods when he allows
that there must be a nature excellently perfect. But it is certain <a id="page-272"/><span class="pgnum">272</span>that
the world is most excellently perfect: nor is it to be doubted that
whatever has life, sense, reason, and understanding must excel that
which is destitute of these things. It follows, then, that the world has
life, sense, reason, and understanding, and is consequently a Deity. But
this shall soon be made more manifest by the operation of these very
things which the world causes.</p>
<p>XVIII. In the mean while, Velleius, let me entreat you not to be always
saying that we are utterly destitute of every sort of learning. The
cone, you say, the cylinder, and the pyramid, are more beautiful to you
than the sphere. This is to have different eyes from other men. But
suppose they are more beautiful to the sight only, which does not appear
to me, for I can see nothing more beautiful than that figure which
contains all others, and which has nothing rough in it, nothing
offensive, nothing cut into angles, nothing broken, nothing swelling,
and nothing hollow; yet as there are two forms most esteemed,<a id="FNA-127"/><a href="#FN-127" class="pginternal"><sup>127</sup></a> the
globe in solids (for so the Greek word <span class="greek">σφαῖρα</span>, I think, should be
construed), and the circle, or orb, in planes (in Greek, <span class="greek">κύκλος</span>); and as
they only have an exact similitude of parts in which every extreme is
equally distant from the centre, what can we imagine in nature to be
more just and proper? But if you have never raked into this learned
dust<a id="FNA-128"/><a href="#FN-128" class="pginternal"><sup>128</sup></a> to find out these things, surely, at all events, you natural
philosophers must know that equality of motion and invariable order
could not be preserved in any other figure. Nothing, therefore, can be
more illiterate than to assert, as you are in the habit of doing, that
it is doubtful whether the world is round or not, because it may
possibly be of another shape, and that there are innumerable worlds of
different forms; which Epicurus, if he ever had learned that two and two
are equal to four, would not have said. But while he judges of what is
best by his palate, he does not look up to the “palace of heaven,” as
Ennius calls it.</p>
<p>XIX. For as there are two sorts of stars,<a id="FNA-129"/><a href="#FN-129" class="pginternal"><sup>129</sup></a> one kind of <a id="page-273"/><span class="pgnum">273</span>which
measure their journey from east to west by immutable stages, never in
the least varying from their usual course, while the other completes a
double revolution with an equally constant regularity; from each of
these facts we demonstrate the volubility of the world (which could not
possibly take place in any but a globular form) and the circular orbits
of the stars. And first of all the sun, which has the chief rank among
all the stars, is moved in such a manner that it fills the whole earth
with its light, and illuminates alternately one part of the earth, while
it leaves the other in darkness. The shadow of the earth interposing
causes night; and the intervals of night are equal to those of day. And
it is the regular approaches and retreats of the sun from which arise
the regulated degrees of cold and heat. His annual circuit is in three
hundred and sixty-five days, and nearly six hours more.<a id="FNA-130"/><a href="#FN-130" class="pginternal"><sup>130</sup></a> At one time
he bends his course to the north, at another to the south, and thus
produces summer and winter, with the other two seasons, one of which
succeeds the decline of winter, and the other that of summer. And so to
these four changes of the seasons we attribute the origin and cause of
all the productions both of sea and land.</p>
<p>The moon completes the same course every month which the sun does in a
year. The nearer she approaches to the sun, the dimmer light does she
yield, and when most remote from it she shines with the fullest
brilliancy; nor are her figure and form only changed in her wane, but
her situation likewise, which is sometimes in the north and sometimes in
the south. By this course she has a sort of summer and winter solstices;
and by her influence she contributes to the nourishment and increase of
animated <a id="page-274"/><span class="pgnum">274</span>beings, and to the ripeness and maturity of all vegetables.</p>
<p>XX. But most worthy our admiration is the motion of those five stars
which are falsely called wandering stars; for they cannot be said to
wander which keep from all eternity their approaches and retreats, and
have all the rest of their motions, in one regular constant and
established order. What is yet more wonderful in these stars which we
are speaking of is that sometimes they appear, and sometimes they
disappear; sometimes they advance towards the sun, and sometimes they
retreat; sometimes they precede him, and sometimes follow him; sometimes
they move faster, sometimes slower, and sometimes they do not stir in
the least, but for a while stand still. From these unequal motions of
the planets, mathematicians have called that the “great year”<a id="FNA-131"/><a href="#FN-131" class="pginternal"><sup>131</sup></a> in
which the sun, moon, and five wandering stars, having finished their
revolutions, are found in their original situation. In how long a time
this is effected is much disputed, but it must be a certain and definite
period. For the planet Saturn (called by the Greeks <span class="greek">Φαίνον</span>), which is
farthest from the earth, finishes his course in about thirty years; and
in his course there is something very singular, for sometimes he moves
before the sun, sometimes he keeps behind it; at one time lying hidden
in the night, at another again appearing in the morning; and ever
performing the same motions in the same space of time without any
alteration, so as to be for infinite ages regular in these courses.
Beneath this planet, and nearer the earth, is Jupiter, called <span class="greek">Φαέθων</span>,
which passes the same orbit of the twelve signs<a id="FNA-132"/><a href="#FN-132" class="pginternal"><sup>132</sup></a> in twelve years,
and goes through exactly the same variety in its course that the star of
Saturn does. Next to Jupiter is the planet Mars (in Greek, <span class="greek">Πυρόεις</span>),
which finishes its revolution through the same orbit as the two
previously mentioned,<a id="FNA-133"/><a href="#FN-133" class="pginternal"><sup>133</sup></a> in twenty-four months, wanting six days, as I
<a id="page-275"/><span class="pgnum">275</span>imagine. Below this is Mercury (called by the Greeks <span class="greek">Στίλβων</span>), which
performs the same course in little less than a year, and is never
farther distant from the sun than the space of one sign, whether it
precedes or follows it. The lowest of the five planets, and nearest the
earth, is that of Venus (called in Greek <span class="greek">Φωσφόρος</span>). Before the rising of
the sun, it is called the morning-star, and after the setting, the
evening-star. It has the same revolution through the zodiac, both as to
latitude and longitude, with the other planets, in a year, and never is
more than two<a id="FNA-134"/><a href="#FN-134" class="pginternal"><sup>134</sup></a> signs from the sun, whether it precedes or follows
it.</p>
<p>XXI. I cannot, therefore, conceive that this constant course of the
planets, this just agreement in such various motions through all
eternity, can be preserved without a mind, reason, and consideration;
and since we may perceive these qualities in the stars, we cannot but
place them in the rank of Gods. Those which are called the fixed stars
have the same indications of reason and prudence. Their motion is daily,
regular, and constant. They do not move with the sky, nor have they an
adhesion to the firmament, as they who are ignorant of natural
philosophy affirm. For the sky, which is thin, transparent, and suffused
with an equal heat, does not seem by its nature to have power to whirl
about the stars, or to be proper to contain them. The fixed stars,
therefore, have their own sphere, separate and free from any conjunction
with the sky. Their perpetual courses, with that admirable and
incredible regularity of theirs, so plainly declare a divine power and
mind to be in them, that he who cannot perceive that they are also
endowed with divine power must be incapable of all perception whatever.</p>
<p>In the heavens, therefore, there is nothing fortuitous, unadvised,
inconstant, or variable: all there is order, truth, reason, and
constancy; and all the things which are destitute of these qualities are
counterfeit, deceitful, and erroneous, and have their residence about
the earth<a id="FNA-135"/><a href="#FN-135" class="pginternal"><sup>135</sup></a> beneath the moon, the lowest of all the planets. He,
therefore, <a id="page-276"/><span class="pgnum">276</span>who believes that this admirable order and almost incredible
regularity of the heavenly bodies, by which the preservation and entire
safety of all things is secured, is destitute of intelligence, must be
considered to be himself wholly destitute of all intellect whatever.</p>
<p>I think, then, I shall not deceive myself in maintaining this dispute
upon the principle of Zeno, who went the farthest in his search after
truth.</p>
<p>XXII. Zeno, then, defines nature to be “an artificial fire, proceeding
in a regular way to generation;” for he thinks that to create and beget
are especial properties of art, and that whatever may be wrought by the
hands of our artificers is much more skilfully performed by nature, that
is, by this artificial fire, which is the master of all other arts.</p>
<p>According to this manner of reasoning, every particular nature is
artificial, as it operates agreeably to a certain method peculiar to
itself; but that universal nature which embraces all things is said by
Zeno to be not only artificial, but absolutely the artificer, ever
thinking and providing all things useful and proper; and as every
particular nature owes its rise and increase to its own proper seed, so
universal nature has all her motions voluntary, has affections and
desires (by the Greeks called <span class="greek">ὁρμὰς</span>) productive of actions agreeable to
them, like us, who have sense and understanding to direct us. Such,
then, is the intelligence of the universe; for which reason it may be
properly termed prudence or providence (in Greek, <span class="greek">πρόνοια</span>), since her
chiefest care and employment is to provide all things fit for its
duration, that it may want nothing, and, above all, that it may be
adorned with all perfection of beauty and ornament.</p>
<p>XXIII. Thus far have I spoken concerning the universe, and also of the
stars; from whence it is apparent that there is almost an infinite
number of Gods, always in action, but without labor or fatigue; for they
are not composed of veins, nerves, and bones; their food and drink are
not such as cause humors too gross or too subtle; nor are their bodies
such as to be subject to the fear of falls or blows, or in danger of
diseases from a weariness of limbs. Epicurus, to secure his Gods from
such accidents, <a id="page-277"/><span class="pgnum">277</span>has made them only outlines of Deities, void of action;
but our Gods being of the most beautiful form, and situated in the
purest region of the heavens, dispose and rule their course in such a
manner that they seem to contribute to the support and preservation of
all things.</p>
<p>Besides these, there are many other natures which have with reason been
deified by the wisest Grecians, and by our ancestors, in consideration
of the benefits derived from them; for they were persuaded that whatever
was of great utility to human kind must proceed from divine goodness,
and the name of the Deity was applied to that which the Deity produced,
as when we call corn Ceres, and wine Bacchus; whence that saying of
Terence,<a id="FNA-136"/><a href="#FN-136" class="pginternal"><sup>136</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Without Ceres and Bacchus, Venus starves.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">And any quality, also, in which there was any singular virtue was
nominated a Deity, such as Faith and Wisdom, which are placed among the
divinities in the Capitol; the last by Æmilius Scaurus, but Faith was
consecrated before by Atilius Calatinus. You see the temple of Virtue
and that of Honor repaired by M. Marcellus, erected formerly, in the
Ligurian war, by Q. Maximus. Need I mention those dedicated to Help,
Safety, Concord, Liberty, and Victory, which have been called Deities,
because their efficacy has been so great that it could not have
proceeded from any but from some divine power? In like manner are the
names of Cupid, Voluptas, and of Lubentine Venus consecrated, though
they were things vicious and not natural, whatever Velleius may think
to the contrary, for they frequently stimulate nature in too violent a
manner. Everything, then, from which any great utility proceeded was
deified; and, indeed, the names I have just now mentioned are
declaratory of the particular virtue of each Deity.</p>
<p>XXIV. It has been a general custom likewise, that men who have done
important service to the public should be exalted to heaven by fame and
universal consent. Thus Hercules, Castor and Pollux, Æsculapius, and
Liber became Gods (I mean Liber<a id="FNA-137"/><a href="#FN-137" class="pginternal"><sup>137</sup></a> the son of Semele, and not him<a id="FNA-138"/><a href="#FN-138" class="pginternal"><sup>138</sup></a>
whom our ancestors consecrated in such state and <a id="page-278"/><span class="pgnum">278</span>solemnity with Ceres
and Libera; the difference in which may be seen in our Mysteries.<a id="FNA-139"/><a href="#FN-139" class="pginternal"><sup>139</sup></a>
But because the offsprings of our bodies are called “Liberi” (children),
therefore the offsprings of Ceres are called Liber and Libera
(Libera<a id="FNA-140"/><a href="#FN-140" class="pginternal"><sup>140</sup></a> is the feminine, and Liber the masculine); thus likewise
Romulus, or Quirinus—for they are thought to be the same—became a God.</p>
<p>They are justly esteemed as Deities, since their souls subsist and enjoy
eternity, from whence they are perfect and immortal beings.</p>
<p>There is another reason, too, and that founded on natural philosophy,
which has greatly contributed to the number of Deities; namely, the
custom of representing in human form a crowd of Gods who have supplied
the poets with fables, and filled mankind with all sorts of
superstition. Zeno has treated of this subject, but it has been
discussed more at length by Cleanthes and Chrysippus. All Greece was of
opinion that Cœlum was castrated by his son Saturn,<a id="FNA-141"/><a href="#FN-141" class="pginternal"><sup>141</sup></a> and that Saturn
was chained by his son Jupiter. In these impious fables, a physical and
not inelegant meaning is contained; for they would denote that the
celestial, most exalted, and ethereal nature—that is, the fiery nature,
which produces all things by itself—is destitute of that part of the
body which is necessary for the act of generation by conjunction with
another.</p>
<p>XXV. By Saturn they mean that which comprehends the course and
revolution of times and seasons; the Greek name for which Deity implies
as much, for he is called <a id="page-279"/><span class="pgnum">279</span><span class="greek">Κρόνος,</span> which is the same with <span class="greek">Χρόνος</span>, that
is, a “space of time.” But he is called Saturn, because he is filled
(<i>saturatur</i>) with years; and he is usually feigned to have devoured his
children, because time, ever insatiable, consumes the rolling years; but
to restrain him from immoderate haste, Jupiter has confined him to the
course of the stars, which are as chains to him. Jupiter (that is,
<i>juvans pater</i>) signifies a “helping father,” whom, by changing the
cases, we call Jove,<a id="FNA-142"/><a href="#FN-142" class="pginternal"><sup>142</sup></a> <i>a juvando</i>. The poets call him “father of
Gods and men;”<a id="FNA-143"/><a href="#FN-143" class="pginternal"><sup>143</sup></a> and our ancestors “the most good, the most great;”
and as there is something more glorious in itself, and more agreeable to
others, to be good (that is, beneficent) than to be great, the title of
“most good” precedes that of “most great.” This, then, is he whom Ennius
means in the following passage, before quoted—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Look up to the refulgent heaven above,</p>
<p>Which all men call, unanimously, Jove:</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">which is more plainly expressed than in this other passage<a id="FNA-144"/><a href="#FN-144" class="pginternal"><sup>144</sup></a> of the
same poet—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>On whose account I’ll curse that flood of light,</p>
<p>Whate’er it is above that shines so bright.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Our augurs also mean the same, when, for the “thundering and lightning
heaven,” they say the “thundering and lightning Jove.” Euripides, among
many excellent things, has this:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The vast, expanded, boundless sky behold,</p>
<p>See it with soft embrace the earth enfold;</p>
<p>This own the chief of Deities above,</p>
<p>And this acknowledge by the name of Jove.</p>
</div>
<p>XXVI. The air, according to the Stoics, which is between the sea and the
heaven, is consecrated by the name of Juno, and is called the sister and
wife of Jove, because <a id="page-280"/><span class="pgnum">280</span>it resembles the sky, and is in close conjunction
with it. They have made it feminine, because there is nothing softer.
But I believe it is called Juno, <i>a juvando</i> (from helping).</p>
<p>To make three separate kingdoms, by fable, there remained yet the water
and the earth. The dominion of the sea is given, therefore, to Neptune,
a brother, as he is called, of Jove; whose name, Neptunus—as <i>Portunus,
a portu</i>, from a port—is derived <i>a nando</i> (from swimming), the first
letters being a little changed. The sovereignty and power over the earth
is the portion of a God, to whom we, as well as the Greeks, have given a
name that denotes riches (in Latin, <i>Dis</i>; in Greek, <span class="greek">Πλούτων</span>), because
all things arise from the earth and return to it. He forced away
Proserpine (in Greek called <span class="greek">Περσεφόνη</span>), by which the poets mean the
“seed of corn,” from whence comes their fiction of Ceres, the mother of
Proserpine, seeking for her daughter, who was hidden from her. She is
called Ceres, which is the same as Geres—<i>a gerendis
frugibus</i><a id="FNA-145"/><a href="#FN-145" class="pginternal"><sup>145</sup></a>—“from bearing fruit,” the first letter of the word being
altered after the manner of the Greeks, for by them she is called
<span class="greek">Δημήτηρ</span>, the same as <span class="greek">Γημήτηρ</span>.<a id="FNA-146"/><a href="#FN-146" class="pginternal"><sup>146</sup></a> Again, he (<i>qui magna vorteret</i>) “who
brings about mighty changes” is called Mavors; and Minerva is so called
because (<i>minueret</i>, or <i>minaretur</i>) she diminishes or menaces.</p>
<p>XXVII. And as the beginnings and endings of all things are of the
greatest importance, therefore they would have their sacrifices to begin
with Janus.<a id="FNA-147"/><a href="#FN-147" class="pginternal"><sup>147</sup></a> His name is derived <i>ab eundo</i>, from passing; from
whence thorough passages are called <i>jani</i>, and the outward doors of
common houses are called <i>januæ</i>. The name of Vesta is, from the Greeks,
the same with their <span class="greek">Ἑστία</span>. Her province is over altars and hearths; and
in the name of this Goddess, who is the keeper of all things within,
prayers and sacrifices are concluded. The <i>Dii Penates</i>, “household Gods,”
have some affinity with this power, and are so called either from
<i>penus</i>, <a id="page-281"/><span class="pgnum">281</span>“all kind of human provisions,” or because <i>penitus insident</i>
(they reside within), from which, by the poets, they are called
<i>penetrales</i> also. Apollo, a Greek name, is called <i>Sol</i>, the sun; and
Diana, <i>Luna</i>, the moon. The sun (<i>sol</i>) is so named either because he
is <i>solus</i> (alone), so eminent above all the stars; or because he
obscures all the stars, and appears alone as soon as he rises. <i>Luna</i>,
the moon, is so called <i>a lucendo</i> (from shining); she bears the name
also of Lucina: and as in Greece the women in labor invoke Diana
Lucifera, so here they invoke Juno Lucina. She is likewise called Diana
<i>omnivaga</i>, not <i>a venando</i> (from hunting), but because she is reckoned
one of the seven stars that seem to wander.<a id="FNA-148"/><a href="#FN-148" class="pginternal"><sup>148</sup></a> She is called Diana
because she makes a kind of day of the night;<a id="FNA-149"/><a href="#FN-149" class="pginternal"><sup>149</sup></a> and presides over
births, because the delivery is effected sometimes in seven, or at most
in nine, courses of the moon; which, because they make <i>mensa spatia</i>
(measured spaces), are called <i>menses</i> (months). This occasioned a
pleasant observation of Timæus (as he has many). Having said in his
history that “the same night in which Alexander was born, the temple of
Diana at Ephesus was burned down,” he adds, “It is not in the least to
be wondered at, because Diana, being willing to assist at the labor of
Olympias,<a id="FNA-150"/><a href="#FN-150" class="pginternal"><sup>150</sup></a> was absent from home.” But to this Goddess, because <i>ad
res omnes veniret</i>—“she has an influence upon all things”—we have
given the appellation of Venus,<a id="FNA-151"/><a href="#FN-151" class="pginternal"><sup>151</sup></a> from whom the word <i>venustas</i>
(beauty) is rather derived than Venus from <i>venustas</i>.</p>
<p>XXVIII. Do you not see, therefore, how, from the productions of nature
and the useful inventions of men, have arisen fictitious and imaginary
Deities, which have been the foundation of false opinions, pernicious
errors, and wretched superstitions? For we know how the different forms
of the Gods—their ages, apparel, ornaments; their <a id="page-282"/><span class="pgnum">282</span>pedigrees,
marriages, relations, and everything belonging to them—are adapted to
human weakness and represented with our passions; with lust, sorrow, and
anger, according to fabulous history: they have had wars and combats,
not only, as Homer relates, when they have interested themselves in two
different armies, but when they have fought battles in their own defence
against the Titans and giants. These stories, of the greatest weakness
and levity, are related and believed with the most implicit folly.</p>
<p>But, rejecting these fables with contempt, a Deity is diffused in every
part of nature; in earth under the name of Ceres, in the sea under the
name of Neptune, in other parts under other names. Yet whatever they
are, and whatever characters and dispositions they have, and whatever
name custom has given them, we are bound to worship and adore them. The
best, the chastest, the most sacred and pious worship of the Gods is to
reverence them always with a pure, perfect, and unpolluted mind and
voice; for our ancestors, as well as the philosophers, have separated
superstition from religion. They who prayed whole days and sacrificed,
that their children might survive them (<i>ut superstites essent</i>), were
called superstitious, which word became afterward more general; but they
who diligently perused, and, as we may say, read or practised over
again, all the duties relating to the worship of the Gods, were called
<i>religiosi</i>—religious, from <i>relegendo</i>—“reading over again, or
practising;” as <i>elegantes</i>, elegant, <i>ex eligendo</i>, “from choosing,
making a good choice;” <i>diligentes</i>, diligent, <i>ex diligendo</i>, “from
attending on what we love;” <i>intelligentes</i>, intelligent, from
understanding—for the signification is derived in the same manner. Thus
are the words superstitious and religious understood; the one being a
term of reproach, the other of commendation. I think I have now
sufficiently demonstrated that there are Gods, and what they are.</p>
<p>XXIX. I am now to show that the world is governed by the providence of
the Gods. This is an important point, which you Academics endeavor to
confound; and, indeed, the whole contest is with you, Cotta; for your
sect, Velleius, know very little of what is said on different subjects
by other schools. You read and have a taste only for <a id="page-283"/><span class="pgnum">283</span>your own books,
and condemn all others without examination. For instance, when you
mentioned yesterday<a id="FNA-152"/><a href="#FN-152" class="pginternal"><sup>152</sup></a> that prophetic old dame <span class="greek">Πρόνοια</span>, Providence,
invented by the Stoics, you were led into that error by imagining that
Providence was made by them to be a particular Deity that governs the
whole universe, whereas it is only spoken in a short manner; as when it
is said “The commonwealth of Athens is governed by the council,” it is
meant “of the Areopagus;”<a id="FNA-153"/><a href="#FN-153" class="pginternal"><sup>153</sup></a> so when we say “The world is governed by
providence,” we mean “by the providence of the Gods.” To express
ourselves, therefore, more fully and clearly, we say, “The world is
governed by the providence of the Gods.” Be not, therefore, lavish of
your railleries, of which your sect has little to spare: if I may advise
you, do not attempt it. It does not become you, it is not your talent,
nor is it in your power. This is not applied to you in particular who
have the education and politeness of a Roman, but to all your sect in
general, and especially to your leader<a id="FNA-154"/><a href="#FN-154" class="pginternal"><sup>154</sup></a>—a man unpolished,
illiterate, insulting, without wit, without reputation, without
elegance.</p>
<p>XXX. I assert, then, that the universe, with all its parts, was
originally constituted, and has, without any cessation, been ever
governed by the providence of the Gods. This argument we Stoics commonly
divide into three parts; the first of which is, that the existence of
the Gods being once known, it must follow that the world is governed by
their wisdom; the second, that as everything is under the direction of
an intelligent nature, which has produced that beautiful order in the
world, it is evident that it is formed from animating principles; the
third is deduced from those glorious works which we behold in the
heavens and the earth.</p>
<p>First, then, we must either deny the existence of the Gods (as
Democritus and Epicurus by their doctrine of images in some sort do),
or, if we acknowledge that there <a id="page-284"/><span class="pgnum">284</span>are Gods, we must believe they are
employed, and that, too, in something excellent. Now, nothing is so
excellent as the administration of the universe. The universe,
therefore, is governed by the wisdom of the Gods. Otherwise, we must
imagine that there is some cause superior to the Deity, whether it be a
nature inanimate, or a necessity agitated by a mighty force, that
produces those beautiful works which we behold. The nature of the Gods
would then be neither supreme nor excellent, if you subject it to that
necessity or to that nature, by which you would make the heaven, the
earth, and the seas to be governed. But there is nothing superior to the
Deity; the world, therefore, must be governed by him: consequently, the
Deity is under no obedience or subjection to nature, but does himself
rule over all nature. In effect, if we allow the Gods have
understanding, we allow also their providence, which regards the most
important things; for, can they be ignorant of those important things,
and how they are to be conducted and preserved, or do they want power to
sustain and direct them? Ignorance is inconsistent with the nature of
the Gods, and imbecility is repugnant to their majesty. From whence it
follows, as we assert, that the world is governed by the providence of
the Gods.</p>
<p>XXXI. But supposing, which is incontestable, that there are Gods, they
must be animated, and not only animated, but endowed with
reason—united, as we may say, in a civil agreement and society, and
governing together one universe, as a republic or city. Thus the same
reason, the same verity, the same law, which ordains good and prohibits
evil, exists in the Gods as it does in men. From them, consequently, we
have prudence and understanding, for which reason our ancestors erected
temples to the Mind, Faith, Virtue, and Concord. Shall we not then allow
the Gods to have these perfections, since we worship the sacred and
august images of them? But if understanding, faith, virtue, and concord
reside in human kind, how could they come on earth, unless from heaven?
And if we are possessed of wisdom, reason, and prudence, the Gods must
have the same qualities in a greater degree; and not only have them, but
employ them in the best and greatest works. The universe is the best and
greatest <a id="page-285"/><span class="pgnum">285</span>work; therefore it must be governed by the wisdom and
providence of the Gods.</p>
<p>Lastly, as we have sufficiently shown that those glorious and luminous
bodies which we behold are Deities—I mean the sun, the moon, the fixed
and wandering stars, the firmament, and the world itself, and those
other things also which have any singular virtue, and are of any great
utility to human kind—it follows that all things are governed by
providence and a divine mind. But enough has been said on the first
part.</p>
<p>XXXII. It is now incumbent on me to prove that all things are subjected
to nature, and most beautifully directed by her. But, first of all, it
is proper to explain precisely what that nature is, in order to come to
the more easy understanding of what I would demonstrate. Some think that
nature is a certain irrational power exciting in bodies the necessary
motions. Others, that it is an intelligent power, acting by order and
method, designing some end in every cause, and always aiming at that
end, whose works express such skill as no art, no hand, can imitate;
for, they say, such is the virtue of its seed, that, however small it
is, if it falls into a place proper for its reception, and meets with
matter conducive to its nourishment and increase, it forms and produces
everything in its respective kind; either vegetables, which receive
their nourishment from their roots; or animals, endowed with motion,
sense, appetite, and abilities to beget their likeness.</p>
<p>Some apply the word nature to everything; as Epicurus does, who
acknowledges no cause, but atoms, a vacuum, and their accidents. But
when we<a id="FNA-155"/><a href="#FN-155" class="pginternal"><sup>155</sup></a> say that nature forms and governs the world, we do not
apply it to a clod of earth, or piece of stone, or anything of that
sort, whose parts have not the necessary cohesion,<a id="FNA-156"/><a href="#FN-156" class="pginternal"><sup>156</sup></a> but to a tree,
in <a id="page-286"/><span class="pgnum">286</span>which there is not the appearance of chance, but of order and a
resemblance of art.</p>
<p>XXXIII. But if the art of nature gives life and increase to vegetables,
without doubt it supports the earth itself; for, being impregnated with
seeds, she produces every kind of vegetable, and embracing their roots,
she nourishes and increases them; while, in her turn, she receives her
nourishment from the other elements, and by her exhalations gives proper
sustenance to the air, the sky, and all the superior bodies. If nature
gives vigor and support to the earth, by the same reason she has an
influence over the rest of the world; for as the earth gives nourishment
to vegetables, so the air is the preservation of animals. The air sees
with us, hears with us, and utters sounds with us; without it, there
would be no seeing, hearing, or sounding. It even moves with us; for
wherever we go, whatever motion we make, it seems to retire and give
place to us.</p>
<p>That which inclines to the centre, that which rises from it to the
surface, and that which rolls about the centre, constitute the universal
world, and make one entire nature; and as there are four sorts of
bodies, the continuance of nature is caused by their reciprocal changes;
for the water arises from the earth, the air from the water, and the
fire from the air; and, reversing this order, the air arises from fire,
the water from the air, and from the water the earth, the lowest of the
four elements, of which all beings are formed. Thus by their continual
motions backward and forward, upward and downward, the conjunction of
the several parts of the universe is preserved; a union which, in the
beauty we now behold it, must be eternal, or at least of a very long
duration, and almost for an infinite space of time; and, whichever it
is, the universe must of consequence be governed by nature. For what art
of navigating fleets, or of marshalling an army, and—to instance the
produce of nature—what vine, what tree, what animated form and
conformation of their members, give us so great an indication of skill
as appears in the universe? Therefore we must either deny that there is
the least trace of an intelligent nature, or acknowledge that the world
is governed by it. But since the universe <a id="page-287"/><span class="pgnum">287</span>contains all particular
beings, as well as their seeds, can we say that it is not itself
governed by nature? That would be the same as saying that the teeth and
the beard of man are the work of nature, but that the man himself is
not. Thus the effect would be understood to be greater than the cause.</p>
<p>XXXIV. Now, the universe sows, as I may say, plants, produces, raises,
nourishes, and preserves what nature administers, as members and parts
of itself. If nature, therefore, governs them, she must also govern the
universe. And, lastly, in nature’s administration there is nothing
faulty. She produced the best possible effect out of those elements
which existed. Let any one show how it could have been better. But that
can never be; and whoever attempts to mend it will either make it worse,
or aim at impossibilities.</p>
<p>But if all the parts of the universe are so constituted that nothing
could be better for use or beauty, let us consider whether this is the
effect of chance, or whether, in such a state they could possibly
cohere, but by the direction of wisdom and divine providence. Nature,
therefore, cannot be void of reason, if art can bring nothing to
perfection without it, and if the works of nature exceed those of art.
How is it consistent with common-sense that when you view an image or a
picture, you imagine it is wrought by art; when you behold afar off a
ship under sail, you judge it is steered by reason and art; when you see
a dial or water-clock,<a id="FNA-157"/><a href="#FN-157" class="pginternal"><sup>157</sup></a> you believe the hours are shown by art, and
not by chance; and yet that you should imagine that the universe, which
contains all arts and the artificers, can be void of reason and
understanding?</p>
<p>But if that sphere which was lately made by our friend Posidonius, the
regular revolutions of which show the course of the sun, moon, and five
wandering stars, as it is every day and night performed, were carried
into Scythia or Britain, who, in those barbarous countries, would doubt
that that sphere had been made so perfect by the exertion of reason?</p>
<p>XXXV. Yet these people<a id="FNA-158"/><a href="#FN-158" class="pginternal"><sup>158</sup></a> doubt whether the universe, <a id="page-288"/><span class="pgnum">288</span>from whence all
things arise and are made, is not the effect of chance, or some
necessity, rather than the work of reason and a divine mind. According
to them, Archimedes shows more knowledge in representing the motions of
the celestial globe than nature does in causing them, though the copy is
so infinitely beneath the original. The shepherd in Attius,<a id="FNA-159"/><a href="#FN-159" class="pginternal"><sup>159</sup></a> who had
never seen a ship, when he perceived from a mountain afar off the divine
vessel of the Argonauts, surprised and frighted at this new object,
expressed himself in this manner:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>What horrid bulk is that before my eyes,</p>
<p>Which o’er the deep with noise and vigor flies?</p>
<p>It turns the whirlpools up, its force so strong,</p>
<p>And drives the billows as it rolls along.</p>
<p>The ocean’s violence it fiercely braves;</p>
<p>Runs furious on, and throws about the waves.</p>
<p>Swiftly impetuous in its course, and loud,</p>
<p>Like the dire bursting of a show’ry cloud;</p>
<p>Or, like a rock, forced by the winds and rain,</p>
<p>Now whirl’d aloft, then plunged into the main.</p>
<p>But hold! perhaps the Earth and Neptune jar,</p>
<p>And fiercely wage an elemental war;</p>
<p>Or Triton with his trident has o’erthrown</p>
<p>His den, and loosen’d from the roots the stone;</p>
<p>The rocky fragment, from the bottom torn,</p>
<p>Is lifted up, and on the surface borne.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">At first he is in suspense at the sight of this unknown object; but on
seeing the young mariners, and hearing their singing, he says,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Like sportive dolphins, with their snouts they roar;<a id="FNA-160"/><a href="#FN-160" class="pginternal"><sup>160</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">and afterward goes on,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Loud in my ears methinks their voices ring,</p>
<p>As if I heard the God Sylvanus sing.</p>
</div>
<p>As at first view the shepherd thinks he sees something inanimate and
insensible, but afterward, judging by more <a id="page-289"/><span class="pgnum">289</span>trustworthy indications, he
begins to figure to himself what it is; so philosophers, if they are
surprised at first at the sight of the universe, ought, when they have
considered the regular, uniform, and immutable motions of it, to
conceive that there is some Being that is not only an inhabitant of this
celestial and divine mansion, but a ruler and a governor, as architect
of this mighty fabric.</p>
<p>XXXVI. Now, in my opinion, they<a id="FNA-161"/><a href="#FN-161" class="pginternal"><sup>161</sup></a> do not seem to have even the least
suspicion that the heavens and earth afford anything marvellous. For, in
the first place, the earth is situated in the middle part of the
universe, and is surrounded on all sides by the air, which we breathe,
and which is called “aer,”<a id="FNA-162"/><a href="#FN-162" class="pginternal"><sup>162</sup></a> which, indeed, is a Greek word; but by
constant use it is well understood by our countrymen, for, indeed, it is
employed as a Latin word. The air is encompassed by the boundless ether
(sky), which consists of the fires above. This word we borrow also, for
we use <i>æther</i> in Latin as well as <i>aer;</i> though Pacuvius thus expresses
it,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p class="L6" style="margin-left: 10ex">—This, of which I speak,</p>
<p>In Latin’s <i>cœlum</i>, <i>æther</i> call’d in Greek.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">As though he were not a Greek into whose mouth he puts this sentence;
but he is speaking in Latin, though we listen as if he were speaking
Greek; for, as he says elsewhere,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>His speech discovers him a Grecian born.</p>
</div>
<p>But to return to more important matters. In the sky innumerable fiery
stars exist, of which the sun is the chief, enlightening all with his
refulgent splendor, and being by many degrees larger than the whole
earth; and this multitude of vast fires are so far from hurting the
earth, and things terrestrial, that they are of benefit to them;
whereas, if they were moved from their stations, we should inevitably be
burned through the want of a proper moderation and temperature of heat.</p>
<p>XXXVII. Is it possible for any man to behold these things, and yet
imagine that certain solid and individual bodies move by their natural
force and gravitation, and that a world so beautifully adorned was made
by their fortuitous concourse? He who believes this may as well <a id="page-290"/><span class="pgnum">290</span>believe
that if a great quantity of the one-and-twenty letters, composed either
of gold or any other matter, were thrown upon the ground, they would
fall into such order as legibly to form the Annals of Ennius. I doubt
whether fortune could make a single verse of them. How, therefore, can
these people assert that the world was made by the fortuitous concourse
of atoms, which have no color, no quality—which the Greeks call
<span class="greek">ποιότης</span>, no sense? or that there are innumerable worlds, some rising and
some perishing, in every moment of time? But if a concourse of atoms can
make a world, why not a porch, a temple, a house, a city, which are
works of less labor and difficulty?</p>
<p>Certainly those men talk so idly and inconsiderately concerning this
lower world that they appear to me never to have contemplated the
wonderful magnificence of the heavens; which is the next topic for our
consideration.</p>
<p>Well, then, did Aristotle<a id="FNA-163"/><a href="#FN-163" class="pginternal"><sup>163</sup></a> observe: “If there were men whose
habitations had been always underground, in great and commodious houses,
adorned with statues and pictures, furnished with everything which they
who are reputed happy abound with; and if, without stirring from thence,
they should be informed of a certain divine power and majesty, and,
after some time, the earth should open, and they should quit their dark
abode to come to us, where they should immediately behold the earth, the
seas, the heavens; should consider the vast extent of the clouds and
force of the winds; should see the sun, and observe his grandeur and
beauty, and also his generative power, inasmuch as day is occasioned by
the diffusion of his light through the sky; and when night has obscured
the earth, they should contemplate the heavens bespangled and adorned
with stars, the surprising variety of the moon in her increase and wane,
the rising and setting of all the stars, and the inviolable regularity
of their courses; when,” says he, “they should see these things, they
would undoubtedly conclude that there are Gods, and that these are their
mighty works.”</p>
<p>XXXVIII. Thus far Aristotle. Let us imagine, also, as great darkness as
was formerly occasioned by the irruption of the fires of Mount Ætna,
which are said to have obscured <a id="page-291"/><span class="pgnum">291</span>the adjacent countries for two days to
such a degree that no man could recognize his fellow; but on the third,
when the sun appeared, they seemed to be risen from the dead. Now, if we
should be suddenly brought from a state of eternal darkness to see the
light, how beautiful would the heavens seem! But our minds have become
used to it from the daily practice and habituation of our eyes, nor do
we take the trouble to search into the principles of what is always in
view; as if the novelty, rather than the importance, of things ought to
excite us to investigate their causes.</p>
<p>Is he worthy to be called a man who attributes to chance, not to an
intelligent cause, the constant motion of the heavens, the regular
courses of the stars, the agreeable proportion and connection of all
things, conducted with so much reason that our intellect itself is
unable to estimate it rightly? When we see machines move artificially,
as a sphere, a clock, or the like, do we doubt whether they are the
productions of reason? And when we behold the heavens moving with a
prodigious celerity, and causing an annual succession of the different
seasons of the year, which vivify and preserve all things, can we doubt
that this world is directed, I will not say only by reason, but by
reason most excellent and divine? For without troubling ourselves with
too refined a subtlety of discussion, we may use our eyes to contemplate
the beauty of those things which we assert have been arranged by divine
providence.</p>
<p>XXXIX. First, let us examine the earth, whose situation is in the middle
of the universe,<a id="FNA-164"/><a href="#FN-164" class="pginternal"><sup>164</sup></a> solid, round, and conglobular by its natural
tendency; clothed with flowers, herbs, trees, and fruits; the whole in
multitudes incredible, and with a variety suitable to every taste: let
us consider the ever-cool and running springs, the clear waters of the
rivers, the verdure of their banks, the hollow depths of caves, the
cragginess of rocks, the heights of impending mountains, and the
boundless extent of plains, the hidden veins of gold and silver, and the
infinite quarries of marble.</p>
<p><a id="page-292"/><span class="pgnum">292</span>What and how various are the kinds of animals, tame or wild? The
flights and notes of birds? How do the beasts live in the fields and in
the forests? What shall I say of men, who, being appointed, as we may
say, to cultivate the earth, do not suffer its fertility to be choked
with weeds, nor the ferocity of beasts to make it desolate; who, by the
houses and cities which they build, adorn the fields, the isles, and the
shores? If we could view these objects with the naked eye, as we can by
the contemplation of the mind, nobody, at such a sight, would doubt
there was a divine intelligence.</p>
<p>But how beautiful is the sea! How pleasant to see the extent of it! What
a multitude and variety of islands! How delightful are the coasts! What
numbers and what diversity of inhabitants does it contain; some within
the bosom of it, some floating on the surface, and others by their
shells cleaving to the rocks! While the sea itself, approaching to the
land, sports so closely to its shores that those two elements appear to
be but one.</p>
<p>Next above the sea is the air, diversified by day and night: when
rarefied, it possesses the higher region; when condensed, it turns into
clouds, and with the waters which it gathers enriches the earth by the
rain. Its agitation produces the winds. It causes heat and cold
according to the different seasons. It sustains birds in their flight;
and, being inhaled, nourishes and preserves all animated beings.</p>
<p>XL. Add to these, which alone remaineth to be mentioned, the firmament
of heaven, a region the farthest from our abodes, which surrounds and
contains all things. It is likewise called ether, or sky, the extreme
bounds and limits of the universe, in which the stars perform their
appointed courses in a most wonderful manner; among which, the sun,
whose magnitude far surpasses the earth, makes his revolution round it,
and by his rising and setting causes day and night; sometimes coming
near towards the earth, and sometimes going from it, he every year makes
two contrary reversions<a id="FNA-165"/><a href="#FN-165" class="pginternal"><sup>165</sup></a> from the extreme <a id="page-293"/><span class="pgnum">293</span>point of its course. In
his retreat the earth seems locked up in sadness; in his return it
appears exhilarated with the heavens. The moon, which, as mathematicians
demonstrate, is bigger than half the earth, makes her revolutions
through the same spaces<a id="FNA-166"/><a href="#FN-166" class="pginternal"><sup>166</sup></a> as the sun; but at one time approaching,
and at another receding from, the sun, she diffuses the light which she
has borrowed from him over the whole earth, and has herself also many
various changes in her appearance. When she is found under the sun, and
opposite to it, the brightness of her rays is lost; but when the earth
directly interposes between the moon and sun, the moon is totally
eclipsed. The other wandering stars have their courses round the earth
in the same spaces,<a id="FNA-167"/><a href="#FN-167" class="pginternal"><sup>167</sup></a> and rise and set in the same manner; their
motions are sometimes quick, sometimes slow, and often they stand still.
There is nothing more wonderful, nothing more beautiful. There is a vast
number of fixed stars, distinguished by the names of certain figures, to
which we find they have some resemblance.</p>
<p>XLI. I will here, says Balbus, looking at me, make use of the verses
which, when you were young, you translated from Aratus,<a id="FNA-168"/><a href="#FN-168" class="pginternal"><sup>168</sup></a> and which,
because they are in Latin, gave me so much delight that I have many of
them still in my memory. As then, we daily see, without any change or
variation,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p class="L6" style="margin-left: 25ex">—the rest<a id="FNA-169"/><a href="#FN-169" class="pginternal"><sup>169</sup></a></p>
<p>Swiftly pursue the course to which they’re bound;</p>
<p>And with the heavens the days and nights go round;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">the contemplation of which, to a mind desirous of observing the
constancy of nature, is inexhaustible.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The extreme top of either point is call’d</p>
<p>The pole.<a id="FNA-170"/><a href="#FN-170" class="pginternal"><sup>170</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont"><a id="page-294"/><span class="pgnum">294</span>About this the two <span class="greek">Ἄρκτοι</span> are turned, which never set;</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Of these, the Greeks one Cynosura call,</p>
<p>The other Helice.<a id="FNA-171"/><a href="#FN-171" class="pginternal"><sup>171</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">The brightest stars,<a id="FNA-172"/><a href="#FN-172" class="pginternal"><sup>172</sup></a> indeed, of Helice are discernible all night,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Which are by us Septentriones call’d.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Cynosura moves about the same pole, with a like number of stars, and
ranged in the same order:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>This<a id="FNA-173"/><a href="#FN-173" class="pginternal"><sup>173</sup></a> the Phœnicians choose to make their guide</p>
<p>When on the ocean in the night they ride.</p>
<p>Adorned with stars of more refulgent light,</p>
<p>The other<a id="FNA-174"/><a href="#FN-174" class="pginternal"><sup>174</sup></a> shines, and first appears at night.</p>
<p>Though this is small, sailors its use have found;</p>
<p>More inward is its course, and short its round.</p>
</div>
<p>XLII. The aspect of those stars is the more admirable, because,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The Dragon grim between them bends his way,</p>
<p>As through the winding banks the currents stray,</p>
<p>And up and down in sinuous bending rolls.<a id="FNA-175"/><a href="#FN-175" class="pginternal"><sup>175</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">His whole form is excellent; but the shape of his head and the ardor of
his eyes are most remarkable.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Various the stars which deck his glittering head;</p>
<p>His temples are with double glory spread;</p>
<p>From his fierce eyes two fervid lights afar</p>
<p>Flash, and his chin shines with one radiant star;</p>
<p>Bow’d is his head; and his round neck he bends,</p>
<p>And to the tail of Helice<a id="FNA-176"/><a href="#FN-176" class="pginternal"><sup>176</sup></a> extends.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">The rest of the Dragon’s body we see<a id="FNA-177"/><a href="#FN-177" class="pginternal"><sup>177</sup></a> at every hour in the night.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p><a id="page-295"/><span class="pgnum">295</span>Here<a id="FNA-178"/><a href="#FN-178" class="pginternal"><sup>178</sup></a> suddenly the head a little hides</p>
<p>Itself, where all its parts, which are in sight,</p>
<p>And those unseen in the same place unite.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Near to this head</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Is placed the figure of a man that moves</p>
<p>Weary and sad,</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">which the Greeks</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Engonasis do call, because he’s borne<a id="FNA-179"/><a href="#FN-179" class="pginternal"><sup>179</sup></a></p>
<p>About with bended knee. Near him is placed</p>
<p>The crown with a refulgent lustre graced.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">This indeed is at his back; but Anguitenens (the Snake-holder) is near
his head:<a id="FNA-180"/><a href="#FN-180" class="pginternal"><sup>180</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The Greeks him Ophiuchus call, renown’d</p>
<p>The name. He strongly grasps the serpent round</p>
<p>With both his hands; himself the serpent folds</p>
<p>Beneath his breast, and round his middle holds;</p>
<p>Yet gravely he, bright shining in the skies,</p>
<p>Moves on, and treads on Nepa’s<a id="FNA-181"/><a href="#FN-181" class="pginternal"><sup>181</sup></a> breast and eyes.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">The Septentriones<a id="FNA-182"/><a href="#FN-182" class="pginternal"><sup>182</sup></a> are followed by—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Arctophylax,<a id="FNA-183"/><a href="#FN-183" class="pginternal"><sup>183</sup></a> that’s said to be the same</p>
<p>Which we Boötes call, who has the name,</p>
<p>Because he drives the Greater Bear along</p>
<p>Yoked to a wain.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Besides, in Boötes,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>A star of glittering rays about his waist,</p>
<p>Arcturus called, a name renown’d, is placed.<a id="FNA-184"/><a href="#FN-184" class="pginternal"><sup>184</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont"><a id="page-296"/><span class="pgnum">296</span>Beneath which is</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The Virgin of illustrious form, whose hand</p>
<p>Holds a bright spike.</p>
</div>
<p>XLIII. And truly these signs are so regularly disposed that a divine
wisdom evidently appears in them:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Beneath the Bear’s<a id="FNA-185"/><a href="#FN-185" class="pginternal"><sup>185</sup></a> head have the Twins their seat,</p>
<p>Under his chest the Crab, beneath his feet</p>
<p>The mighty Lion darts a trembling flame.<a id="FNA-186"/><a href="#FN-186" class="pginternal"><sup>186</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">The Charioteer</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>On the left side of Gemini we see,<a id="FNA-187"/><a href="#FN-187" class="pginternal"><sup>187</sup></a></p>
<p>And at his head behold fierce Helice;</p>
<p>On his left shoulder the bright Goat appears.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">But to proceed—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>This is indeed a great and glorious star,</p>
<p>On th’ other side the Kids, inferior far,</p>
<p>Yield but a slender light to mortal eyes.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Under his feet</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The horned bull,<a id="FNA-188"/><a href="#FN-188" class="pginternal"><sup>188</sup></a> with sturdy limbs, is placed:</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">his head is spangled with a number of stars;</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>These by the Greeks are called the Hyades,</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">from raining; for <span class="greek">ὕειν</span> is to rain: therefore they are injudiciously
called <i>Suculæ</i> by our people, as if they had their name from <span class="greek">ὗς</span>, a sow,
and not from <span class="greek">ὕω</span>.</p>
<p>Behind the Lesser Bear, Cepheus<a id="FNA-189"/><a href="#FN-189" class="pginternal"><sup>189</sup></a> follows with extended hands,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>For close behind the Lesser Bear he comes.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont"><a id="page-297"/><span class="pgnum">297</span>Before him goes</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Cassiopea<a id="FNA-190"/><a href="#FN-190" class="pginternal"><sup>190</sup></a> with a faintish light;</p>
<p>But near her moves (fair and illustrious sight!)</p>
<p>Andromeda,<a id="FNA-191"/><a href="#FN-191" class="pginternal"><sup>191</sup></a> who, with an eager pace,</p>
<p>Seems to avoid her parent’s mournful face.<a id="FNA-192"/><a href="#FN-192" class="pginternal"><sup>192</sup></a></p>
<p>With glittering mane the Horse<a id="FNA-193"/><a href="#FN-193" class="pginternal"><sup>193</sup></a> now seems to tread,</p>
<p>So near he comes, on her refulgent head;</p>
<p>With a fair star, that close to him appears,</p>
<p>A double form<a id="FNA-194"/><a href="#FN-194" class="pginternal"><sup>194</sup></a> and but one light he wears;</p>
<p>By which he seems ambitious in the sky</p>
<p>An everlasting knot of stars to tie.</p>
<p>Near him the Ram, with wreathed horns, is placed;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">by whom</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The Fishes<a id="FNA-195"/><a href="#FN-195" class="pginternal"><sup>195</sup></a> are; of which one seems to haste</p>
<p>Somewhat before the other, to the blast</p>
<p>Of the north wind exposed.</p>
</div>
<p>XLIV. Perseus is described as placed at the feet of Andromeda:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>And him the sharp blasts of the north wind beat.</p>
<p>Near his left knee, but dim their light, their seat</p>
<p>The small Pleiades<a id="FNA-196"/><a href="#FN-196" class="pginternal"><sup>196</sup></a> maintain. We find,</p>
<p>Not far from them, the Lyre<a id="FNA-197"/><a href="#FN-197" class="pginternal"><sup>197</sup></a> but slightly join’d.</p>
<p>Next is the winged Bird,<a id="FNA-198"/><a href="#FN-198" class="pginternal"><sup>198</sup></a> that seems to fly</p>
<p>Beneath the spacious covering of the sky.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont"><a id="page-298"/><span class="pgnum">298</span>Near the head of the Horse<a id="FNA-199"/><a href="#FN-199" class="pginternal"><sup>199</sup></a> lies the right hand of Aquarius, then
all Aquarius himself.<a id="FNA-200"/><a href="#FN-200" class="pginternal"><sup>200</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Then Capricorn, with half the form of beast,</p>
<p>Breathes chill and piercing colds from his strong breast,</p>
<p>And in a spacious circle takes his round;</p>
<p>When him, while in the winter solstice bound,</p>
<p>The sun has visited with constant light,</p>
<p>He turns his course, and shorter makes the night.<a id="FNA-201"/><a href="#FN-201" class="pginternal"><sup>201</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Not far from hence is seen</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The Scorpion<a id="FNA-202"/><a href="#FN-202" class="pginternal"><sup>202</sup></a> rising lofty from below;</p>
<p>By him the Archer,<a id="FNA-203"/><a href="#FN-203" class="pginternal"><sup>203</sup></a> with his bended bow;</p>
<p>Near him the Bird, with gaudy feathers spread;</p>
<p>And the fierce Eagle<a id="FNA-204"/><a href="#FN-204" class="pginternal"><sup>204</sup></a> hovers o’er his head.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Next comes the Dolphin;<a id="FNA-205"/><a href="#FN-205" class="pginternal"><sup>205</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Then bright Orion,<a id="FNA-206"/><a href="#FN-206" class="pginternal"><sup>206</sup></a> who obliquely moves;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">he is followed by</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The fervent Dog,<a id="FNA-207"/><a href="#FN-207" class="pginternal"><sup>207</sup></a> bright with refulgent stars:</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">next the Hare follows<a id="FNA-208"/><a href="#FN-208" class="pginternal"><sup>208</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Unwearied in his course. At the Dog’s tail</p>
<p>Argo<a id="FNA-209"/><a href="#FN-209" class="pginternal"><sup>209</sup></a> moves on, and moving seems to sail;</p>
<p>O’er her the Ram and Fishes have their place;<a id="FNA-210"/><a href="#FN-210" class="pginternal"><sup>210</sup></a></p>
<p>The illustrious vessel touches, in her pace,</p>
<p>The river’s banks;<a id="FNA-211"/><a href="#FN-211" class="pginternal"><sup>211</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">which you may see winding and extending itself to a great length.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p><a id="page-299"/><span class="pgnum">299</span>The Fetters<a id="FNA-212"/><a href="#FN-212" class="pginternal"><sup>212</sup></a> at the Fishes’ tails are hung.</p>
<p>By Nepa’s<a id="FNA-213"/><a href="#FN-213" class="pginternal"><sup>213</sup></a> head behold the Altar stand,<a id="FNA-214"/><a href="#FN-214" class="pginternal"><sup>214</sup></a></p>
<p>Which by the breath of southern winds is fann’d;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">near which the Centaur<a id="FNA-215"/><a href="#FN-215" class="pginternal"><sup>215</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Hastens his mingled parts to join beneath</p>
<p>The Serpent,<a id="FNA-216"/><a href="#FN-216" class="pginternal"><sup>216</sup></a> there extending his right hand,</p>
<p>To where you see the monstrous Scorpion stand,</p>
<p>Which he at the bright Altar fiercely slays.</p>
<p>Here on her lower parts see Hydra<a id="FNA-217"/><a href="#FN-217" class="pginternal"><sup>217</sup></a> raise</p>
<p>Herself;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">whose bulk is very far extended.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Amid the winding of her body’s placed</p>
<p>The shining Goblet;<a id="FNA-218"/><a href="#FN-218" class="pginternal"><sup>218</sup></a> and the glossy Crow<a id="FNA-219"/><a href="#FN-219" class="pginternal"><sup>219</sup></a></p>
<p>Plunges his beak into her parts below.</p>
<p>Antecanis beneath the Twins is seen,</p>
<p>Call’d Procyon by the Greeks.<a id="FNA-220"/><a href="#FN-220" class="pginternal"><sup>220</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p>Can any one in his senses imagine that this disposition of the stars,
and this heaven so beautifully adorned, could ever have been formed by a
fortuitous concourse of atoms? Or what other nature, being destitute of
intellect and reason, could possibly have produced these effects, which
not only required reason to bring them about, but the very character of
which could not be understood and appreciated without the most strenuous
exertions of well-directed reason?</p>
<p>XLV. But our admiration is not limited to the objects here described.
What is most wonderful is that the world is so durable, and so perfectly
made for lasting that it is not to be impaired by time; for all its
parts tend equally to the centre, and are bound together by a sort of
chain, which surrounds the elements. This chain is nature, which <a id="page-300"/><span class="pgnum">300</span>being
diffused through the universe, and performing all things with judgment
and reason, attracts the extremities to the centre.</p>
<p>If, then, the world is round, and if on that account all its parts,
being of equal dimensions and relative proportions, mutually support and
are supported by one another, it must follow that as all the parts
incline to the centre (for that is the lowest place of a globe) there is
nothing whatever which can put a stop to that propensity in the case of
such great weights. For the same reason, though the sea is higher than
the earth, yet because it has the like tendency, it is collected
everywhere, equally concentres, and never overflows, and is never
wasted.</p>
<p>The air, which is contiguous, ascends by its lightness, but diffuses
itself through the whole; therefore it is by nature joined and united to
the sea, and at the same time borne by the same power towards the
heaven, by the thinness and heat of which it is so tempered as to be
made proper to supply life and wholesome air for the support of animated
beings. This is encompassed by the highest region of the heavens, which
is called the sky, which is joined to the extremity of the air, but
retains its own heat pure and unmixed.</p>
<p>XLVI. The stars have their revolutions in the sky, and are continued by
the tendency of all parts towards the centre. Their duration is
perpetuated by their form and figure, for they are round; which form, as
I think has been before observed, is the least liable to injury; and as
they are composed of fire, they are fed by the vapors which are exhaled
by the sun from the earth, the sea, and other waters; but when these
vapors have nourished and refreshed the stars, and the whole sky, they
are sent back to be exhaled again; so that very little is lost or
consumed by the fire of the stars and the flame of the sky. Hence we
Stoics conclude—which Panætius<a id="FNA-221"/><a href="#FN-221" class="pginternal"><sup>221</sup></a> is said to have doubted of—that
the whole world at last would be consumed by a general conflagration,
when, all moisture being exhausted, neither the earth could have any
nourishment, nor the air return again, since water, of which it is
formed, would then be all consumed; so that only fire would subsist; and
<a id="page-301"/><span class="pgnum">301</span>from this fire, which is an animating power and a Deity, a new world
would arise and be re-established in the same beauty.</p>
<p>I should be sorry to appear to you to dwell too long upon this subject
of the stars, and more especially upon that of the planets, whose
motions, though different, make a very just agreement. Saturn, the
highest, chills; Mars, placed in the middle, burns; while Jupiter,
interposing, moderates their excess, both of light and heat. The two
planets beneath Mars<a id="FNA-222"/><a href="#FN-222" class="pginternal"><sup>222</sup></a> obey the sun. The sun himself fills the whole
universe with his own genial light; and the moon, illuminated by him,
influences conception, birth, and maturity. And who is there who is not
moved by this union of things, and by this concurrence of nature
agreeing together, as it were, for the safety of the world? And yet I
feel sure that none of these reflections have ever been made by these
men.</p>
<p>XLVII. Let us proceed from celestial to terrestrial things. What is
there in them which does not prove the principle of an intelligent
nature? First, as to vegetables; they have roots to sustain their stems,
and to draw from the earth a nourishing moisture to support the vital
principle which those roots contain. They are clothed with a rind or
bark, to secure them more thoroughly from heat and cold. The vines we
see take hold on props with their tendrils, as if with hands, and raise
themselves as if they were animated; it is even said that they shun
cabbages and coleworts, as noxious and pestilential to them, and, if
planted by them, will not touch any part.</p>
<p>But what a vast variety is there of animals! and how wonderfully is
every kind adapted to preserve itself! Some are covered with hides, some
clothed with fleeces, and some guarded with bristles; some are sheltered
with feathers, some with scales; some are armed with horns, and some are
furnished with wings to escape from danger. Nature hath also liberally
and plentifully provided for all animals their proper food. I could
expatiate on the judicious and curious formation and disposition of
their bodies for the reception and digestion of it, for all their
interior parts are so framed and disposed that there is <a id="page-302"/><span class="pgnum">302</span>nothing
superfluous, nothing that is not necessary for the preservation of life.
Besides, nature has also given these beasts appetite and sense; in order
that by the one they may be excited to procure sufficient sustenance,
and by the other they may distinguish what is noxious from what is
salutary. Some animals seek their food walking, some creeping, some
flying, and some swimming; some take it with their mouth and teeth; some
seize it with their claws, and some with their beaks; some suck, some
graze, some bolt it whole, and some chew it. Some are so low that they
can with ease take such food as is to be found on the ground; but the
taller, as geese, swans, cranes, and camels, are assisted by a length of
neck. To the elephant is given a hand,<a id="FNA-223"/><a href="#FN-223" class="pginternal"><sup>223</sup></a> without which, from his
unwieldiness of body, he would scarce have any means of attaining food.</p>
<p>XLVIII. But to those beasts which live by preying on others, nature has
given either strength or swiftness. On some animals she has even
bestowed artifice and cunning; as on spiders, some of which weave a sort
of net to entrap and destroy whatever falls into it, others sit on the
watch unobserved to fall on their prey and devour it. The naker—by the
Greeks called <i>Pinna</i>—has a kind of confederacy with the prawn for
procuring food. It has two large shells open, into which when the little
fishes swim, the naker, having notice given by the bite of the prawn,
closes them immediately. Thus, these little animals, though of different
kinds, seek their food in common; in which it is matter of wonder
whether they associate by any agreement, or are naturally joined
together from their beginning.</p>
<p>There is some cause to admire also the provision of nature in the case
of those aquatic animals which are generated on land, such as
crocodiles, river-tortoises, and a certain kind of serpents, which seek
the water as soon as they are able to drag themselves along. We
frequently put duck-eggs under hens, by which, as by their true mothers,
the ducklings are at first hatched and nourished; but when they see the
water, they forsake them and run to it, as to <a id="page-303"/><span class="pgnum">303</span>their natural abode: so
strong is the impression of nature in animals for their own
preservation.</p>
<p>XLIX. I have read that there is a bird called Platalea (the shoveller),
that lives by watching those fowls which dive into the sea for their
prey, and when they return with it, he squeezes their heads with his
beak till they drop it, and then seizes on it himself. It is said
likewise that he is in the habit of filling his stomach with shell-fish,
and when they are digested by the heat which exists in the stomach, they
cast them up, and then pick out what is proper nourishment. The
sea-frogs, they say, are wont to cover themselves with sand, and moving
near the water, the fishes strike at them, as at a bait, and are
themselves taken and devoured by the frogs. Between the kite and the
crow there is a kind of natural war, and wherever the one finds the eggs
of the other, he breaks them.</p>
<p>But who is there who can avoid being struck with wonder at that which
has been noticed by Aristotle, who has enriched us with so many valuable
remarks? When the cranes<a id="FNA-224"/><a href="#FN-224" class="pginternal"><sup>224</sup></a> pass the sea in search of warmer climes,
they fly in the form of a triangle. By the first angle they repel the
resisting air; on each side, their wings serve as oars to facilitate
their flight; and the basis of their triangle is assisted by the wind in
their stern. Those which are behind rest their necks and heads on those
which precede; and as the leader has not the same relief, because he has
none to lean upon, he at length flies behind that he may also rest,
while one of those which have been eased succeeds him, and through the
whole flight each regularly takes his turn.</p>
<p>I could produce many instances of this kind; but these may suffice. Let
us now proceed to things more familiar to us. The care of beasts for
their own preservation, their circumspection while feeding, and their
manner of taking rest in their lairs, are generally known, but still
they are greatly to be admired.</p>
<p>L. Dogs cure themselves by a vomit, the Egyptian ibis by a purge; from
whence physicians have lately—I mean but few ages since—greatly
improved their art. It is reported <a id="page-304"/><span class="pgnum">304</span>that panthers, which in barbarous
countries are taken with poisoned flesh, have a certain remedy<a id="FNA-225"/><a href="#FN-225" class="pginternal"><sup>225</sup></a> that
preserves them from dying; and that in Crete, the wild goats, when they
are wounded with poisoned arrows, seek for an herb called dittany,
which, when they have tasted, the arrows (they say) drop from their
bodies. It is said also that deer, before they fawn, purge themselves
with a little herb called hartswort.<a id="FNA-226"/><a href="#FN-226" class="pginternal"><sup>226</sup></a> Beasts, when they receive any
hurt, or fear it, have recourse to their natural arms: the bull to his
horns, the boar to his tusks, and the lion to his teeth. Some take to
flight, others hide themselves; the cuttle-fish vomits<a id="FNA-227"/><a href="#FN-227" class="pginternal"><sup>227</sup></a> blood; the
cramp-fish benumbs; and there are many animals that, by their
intolerable stink, oblige their pursuers to retire.</p>
<p>LI. But that the beauty of the world might be eternal, great care has
been taken by the providence of the Gods to perpetuate the different
kinds of animals, and vegetables, and trees, and all those things which
sink deep into the earth, and are contained in it by their roots and
trunks; in order to which every individual has within itself such
fertile seed that many are generated from one; and in vegetables this
seed is enclosed in the heart of their fruit, but in such abundance that
men may plentifully feed on it, and the earth be always replanted.</p>
<p>With regard to animals, do we not see how aptly they are formed for the
propagation of their species? Nature for this end created some males and
some females. Their parts are perfectly framed for generation, and they
have a wonderful propensity to copulation. When the seed has fallen on
the matrix, it draws almost all the nourishment to itself, by which the
fœtus is formed; but as soon as it is discharged from thence, if it is
an animal that is nourished by milk, almost all the food of the mother
turns into milk, and the animal, without any direction but by the pure
instinct of nature, immediately hunts for the <a id="page-305"/><span class="pgnum">305</span>teat, and is there fed
with plenty. What makes it evidently appear that there is nothing in
this fortuitous, but the work of a wise and foreseeing nature, is, that
those females which bring forth many young, as sows and bitches, have
many teats, and those which bear a small number have but few. What
tenderness do beasts show in preserving and raising up their young till
they are able to defend themselves! They say, indeed, that fish, when
they have spawned, leave their eggs; but the water easily supports them,
and produces the young fry in abundance.</p>
<p>LII. It is said, likewise, that tortoises and crocodiles, when they have
laid their eggs on the land, only cover them with earth, and then leave
them, so that their young are hatched and brought up without assistance;
but fowls and other birds seek for quiet places to lay in, where they
build their nests in the softest manner, for the surest preservation of
their eggs; which, when they have hatched, they defend from the cold by
the warmth of their wings, or screen them from the sultry heat of the
sun. When their young begin to be able to use their wings, they attend
and instruct them; and then their cares are at an end.</p>
<p>Human art and industry are indeed necessary towards the preservation and
improvement of certain animals and vegetables; for there are several of
both kinds which would perish without that assistance. There are
likewise innumerable facilities (being different in different places)
supplied to man to aid him in his civilization, and in procuring
abundantly what he requires. The Nile waters Egypt, and after having
overflowed and covered it the whole summer, it retires, and leaves the
fields softened and manured for the reception of seed. The Euphrates
fertilizes Mesopotamia, into which, as we may say, it carries yearly new
fields.<a id="FNA-228"/><a href="#FN-228" class="pginternal"><sup>228</sup></a> The Indus, which is the largest of all rivers,<a id="FNA-229"/><a href="#FN-229" class="pginternal"><sup>229</sup></a> not
only improves and cultivates the ground, <a id="page-306"/><span class="pgnum">306</span>but sows it also; for it is
said to carry with it a great quantity of grain. I could mention many
other countries remarkable for something singular, and many fields,
which are, in their own natures, exceedingly fertile.</p>
<p>LIII. But how bountiful is nature that has provided for us such an
abundance of various and delicious food; and this varying with the
different seasons, so that we may be constantly pleased with change, and
satisfied with abundance! How seasonable and useful to man, to beasts,
and even to vegetables, are the Etesian winds<a id="FNA-230"/><a href="#FN-230" class="pginternal"><sup>230</sup></a> she has bestowed,
which moderate intemperate heat, and render navigation more sure and
speedy! Many things must be omitted on a subject so copious—and still a
great deal must be said—for it is impossible to relate the great
utility of rivers, the flux and reflux of the sea, the mountains clothed
with grass and trees, the salt-pits remote from the sea-coasts, the
earth replete with salutary medicines, or, in short, the innumerable
designs of nature necessary for sustenance and the enjoyment of life. We
must not forget the vicissitudes of day and night, ordained for the
health of animated beings, giving them a time to labor and a time to
rest. Thus, if we every way examine the universe, it is apparent, from
the greatest reason, that the whole is admirably governed by a divine
providence for the safety and preservation of all beings.</p>
<p>If it should be asked for whose sake this mighty fabric was raised,
shall we say for trees and other vegetables, which, though destitute of
sense, are supported by nature? That would be absurd. Is it for beasts?
Nothing can be less probable than that the Gods should have taken such
pains for beings void of speech and understanding. For whom, then, will
any one presume to say that the world was made? Undoubtedly for
reasonable beings; these are the Gods and men, who are certainly the
most perfect of all beings, as nothing is equal to reason. It is
therefore credible that the universe, and all things in it, were made
for the Gods and for men.</p>
<p>But we may yet more easily comprehend that the Gods have taken great
care of the interests and welfare of men, <a id="page-307"/><span class="pgnum">307</span>if we examine thoroughly into
the structure of the body, and the form and perfection of human nature.
There are three things absolutely necessary for the support of life—to
eat, to drink, and to breathe. For these operations the mouth is most
aptly framed, which, by the assistance of the nostrils, draws in the
more air.</p>
<p>LIV. The teeth are there placed to divide and grind the food.<a id="FNA-231"/><a href="#FN-231" class="pginternal"><sup>231</sup></a> The
fore-teeth, being sharp and opposite to each other, cut it asunder, and
the hind-teeth (called the grinders) chew it, in which office the tongue
seems to assist. At the root of the tongue is the gullet, which receives
whatever is swallowed: it touches the tonsils on each side, and
terminates at the interior extremity of the palate. When, by the motions
of the tongue, the food is forced into this passage, it descends, and
those parts of the gullet which are below it are dilated, and those
above are contracted. There is another passage, called by physicians the
rough artery,<a id="FNA-232"/><a href="#FN-232" class="pginternal"><sup>232</sup></a> which reaches to the lungs, for the entrance and
return of the air we breathe; and as its orifice is joined to the roots
of the tongue a little above the part to which the gullet is annexed, it
is furnished with a sort of coverlid,<a id="FNA-233"/><a href="#FN-233" class="pginternal"><sup>233</sup></a> lest, by the accidental
falling of any food into it, the respiration should be stopped.</p>
<p>As the stomach, which is beneath the gullet, receives the meat and
drink, so the lungs and the heart draw in the air from without. The
stomach is wonderfully composed, consisting almost wholly of nerves; it
abounds with membranes and fibres, and detains what it receives, whether
solid or liquid, till it is altered and digested. It sometimes
contracts, sometimes dilates. It blends and mixes the food together, so
that it is easily concocted and digested by its force of heat, and by
the animal spirits is distributed into the other parts of the body.</p>
<p>LV. As to the lungs, they are of a soft and spongy substance, which
renders them the most commodious for respiration; <a id="page-308"/><span class="pgnum">308</span>they alternately
dilate and contract to receive and return the air, that what is the
chief animal sustenance may be always fresh. The juice,<a id="FNA-234"/><a href="#FN-234" class="pginternal"><sup>234</sup></a> by which we
are nourished, being separated from the rest of the food, passes the
stomach and intestines to the liver, through open and direct passages,
which lead from the mesentery to the gates of the liver (for so they
call those vessels at the entrance of it). There are other passages from
thence, through which the food has its course when it has passed the
liver. When the bile, and those humors which proceed from the kidneys,
are separated from the food, the remaining part turns to blood, and
flows to those vessels at the entrance of the liver to which all the
passages adjoin. The chyle, being conveyed from this place through them
into the vessel called the hollow vein, is mixed together, and, being
already digested and distilled, passes into the heart; and from the
heart it is communicated through a great number of veins to every part
of the body.</p>
<p>It is not difficult to describe how the gross remains are detruded by
the motion of the intestines, which contract and dilate; but that must
be declined, as too indelicate for discourse. Let us rather explain that
other wonder of nature, the air, which is drawn into the lungs, receives
heat both by that already in and by the coagitation of the lungs; one
part is turned back by respiration, and the other is received into a
place called the ventricle of the heart.<a id="FNA-235"/><a href="#FN-235" class="pginternal"><sup>235</sup></a> There is another ventricle
like it annexed to the heart, into which the blood flows from the liver
through the hollow vein. Thus by one ventricle the blood is diffused to
the extremities through the veins, and by the other the breath is
communicated through the arteries; and there are such numbers of both
dispersed through the whole body that they manifest a divine art.</p>
<p>Why need I speak of the bones, those supports of the body, whose joints
are so wonderfully contrived for stability, and to render the limbs
complete with regard to motion and to every action of the body? Or need
I mention <a id="page-309"/><span class="pgnum">309</span>the nerves, by which the limbs are governed—their many
interweavings, and their proceeding from the heart,<a id="FNA-236"/><a href="#FN-236" class="pginternal"><sup>236</sup></a> from whence,
like the veins and arteries, they have their origin, and are distributed
through the whole corporeal frame?</p>
<p>LVI. To this skill of nature, and this care of providence, so diligent
and so ingenious, many reflections may be added, which show what
valuable things the Deity has bestowed on man. He has made us of a
stature tall and upright, in order that we might behold the heavens, and
so arrive at the knowledge of the Gods; for men are not simply to dwell
here as inhabitants of the earth, but to be, as it were, spectators of
the heavens and the stars, which is a privilege not granted to any other
kind of animated beings. The senses, which are the interpreters and
messengers of things, are placed in the head, as in a tower, and
wonderfully situated for their proper uses; for the eyes, being in the
highest part, have the office of sentinels, in discovering to us
objects; and the ears are conveniently placed in a high part of the
person, being appointed to receive sound, which naturally ascends. The
nostrils have the like situation, because all scent likewise ascends;
and they have, with great reason, a near vicinity to the mouth, because
they assist us in judging of meat and drink. The taste, which is to
distinguish the quality of what we take; is in that part of the mouth
where nature has laid open a passage for what we eat and drink. But the
touch is equally diffused through the whole body, that we may not
receive any blows, or the too rigid attacks of cold and heat, without
feeling them. And as in building the architect averts from the eyes and
nose of the master those things which must necessarily be offensive, so
has nature removed far from our senses what is of the same kind in the
human body.</p>
<p>LVII. What artificer but nature, whose direction is incomparable, could
have exhibited so much ingenuity in the formation of the senses? In the
first place, she has covered and invested the eyes with the finest
membranes, which she hath made transparent, that we may see through
<a id="page-310"/><span class="pgnum">310</span>them, and firm in their texture, to preserve the eyes. She has made
them slippery and movable, that they might avoid what would offend them,
and easily direct the sight wherever they will. The actual organ of
sight, which is called the pupil, is so small that it can easily shun
whatever might be hurtful to it. The eyelids, which are their coverings,
are soft and smooth, that they may not injure the eyes; and are made to
shut at the apprehension of any accident, or to open at pleasure; and
these movements nature has ordained to be made in an instant: they are
fortified with a sort of palisade of hairs, to keep off what may be
noxious to them when open, and to be a fence to their repose when sleep
closes them, and allows them to rest as if they were wrapped up in a
case. Besides, they are commodiously hidden and defended by eminences on
every side; for on the upper part the eyebrows turn aside the
perspiration which falls from the head and forehead; the cheeks beneath
rise a little, so as to protect them on the lower side; and the nose is
placed between them as a wall of separation.</p>
<p>The hearing is always open, for that is a sense of which we are in need
even while we are sleeping; and the moment that any sound is admitted by
it we are awakened even from sleep. It has a winding passage, lest
anything should slip into it, as it might if it were straight and
simple. Nature also hath taken the same precaution in making there a
viscous humor, that if any little creatures should endeavor to creep in,
they might stick in it as in bird-lime. The ears (by which we mean the
outward part) are made prominent, to cover and preserve the hearing,
lest the sound should be dissipated and escape before the sense is
affected. Their entrances are hard and horny, and their form winding,
because bodies of this kind better return and increase the sound. This
appears in the harp, lute, or horn;<a id="FNA-237"/><a href="#FN-237" class="pginternal"><sup>237</sup></a> and from all tortuous and
enclosed places sounds are returned stronger.</p>
<p>The nostrils, in like manner, are ever open, because we have a continual
use for them; and their entrances also are rather narrow, lest anything
noxious should enter <a id="page-311"/><span class="pgnum">311</span>them; and they have always a humidity necessary
for the repelling dust and many other extraneous bodies. The taste,
having the mouth for an enclosure, is admirably situated, both in regard
to the use we make of it and to its security.</p>
<p>LVIII. Besides, every human sense is much more exquisite than those of
brutes; for our eyes, in those arts which come under their judgment,
distinguish with great nicety; as in painting, sculpture, engraving, and
in the gesture and motion of bodies. They understand the beauty,
proportion, and, as I may so term it, the becomingness of colors and
figures; they distinguish things of greater importance, even virtues and
vices; they know whether a man is angry or calm, cheerful or sad,
courageous or cowardly, bold or timorous.</p>
<p>The judgment of the ears is not less admirably and scientifically
contrived with regard to vocal and instrumental music. They distinguish
the variety of sounds, the measure, the stops, the different sorts of
voices, the treble and the base, the soft and the harsh, the sharp and
the flat, of which human ears only are capable to judge. There is
likewise great judgment in the smell, the taste, and the touch; to
indulge and gratify which senses more arts have been invented than I
could wish: it is apparent to what excess we have arrived in the
composition of our perfumes, the preparation of our food, and the
enjoyment of corporeal pleasures.</p>
<p>LIX. Again, he who does not perceive the soul and mind of man, his
reason, prudence, and discernment, to be the work of a divine
providence, seems himself to be destitute of those faculties. While I am
on this subject, Cotta, I wish I had your eloquence: how would you
illustrate so fine a subject! You would show the great extent of the
understanding; how we collect our ideas, and join those which follow to
those which precede; establish principles, draw consequences, define
things separately, and comprehend them with accuracy; from whence you
demonstrate how great is the power of intelligence and knowledge, which
is such that even God himself has no qualities more admirable. How
valuable (though you Academics despise and even deny that we have it) is
our <a id="page-312"/><span class="pgnum">312</span>knowledge of exterior objects, from the perception of the senses
joined to the application of the mind; by which we see in what relation
one thing stands to another, and by the aid of which we have invented
those arts which are necessary for the support and pleasure of life. How
charming is eloquence! How divine that mistress of the universe, as you
call it! It teaches us what we were ignorant of, and makes us capable of
teaching what we have learned. By this we exhort others; by this we
persuade them; by this we comfort the afflicted; by this we deliver the
affrighted from their fear; by this we moderate excessive joy; by this
we assuage the passions of lust and anger. This it is which bound men by
the chains of right and law, formed the bonds of civil society, and made
us quit a wild and savage life.</p>
<p>And it will appear incredible, unless you carefully observe the facts,
how complete the work of nature is in giving us the use of speech; for,
first of all, there is an artery from the lungs to the bottom of the
mouth, through which the voice, having its original principle in the
mind, is transmitted. Then the tongue is placed in the mouth, bounded by
the teeth. It softens and modulates the voice, which would otherwise be
confusedly uttered; and, by pushing it to the teeth and other parts of
the mouth, makes the sound distinct and articulate. We Stoics,
therefore, compare the tongue to the bow of an instrument, the teeth to
the strings, and the nostrils to the sounding-board.</p>
<p>LX. But how commodious are the hands which nature has given to man, and
how beautifully do they minister to many arts! For, such is the
flexibility of the joints, that our fingers are closed and opened
without any difficulty. With their help, the hand is formed for
painting, carving, and engraving; for playing on stringed instruments,
and on the pipe. These are matters of pleasure. There are also works of
necessity, such as tilling the ground, building houses, making cloth and
habits, and working in brass and iron. It is the business of the mind to
invent, the senses to perceive, and the hands to execute; so that if we
have buildings, if we are clothed, if we live in safety, if we have
cities, walls, habitations, and temples, it is to the hands we owe them.</p>
<p><a id="page-313"/><span class="pgnum">313</span>By our labor, that is, by our hands, variety and plenty of food are
provided; for, without culture, many fruits, which serve either for
present or future consumption, would not be produced; besides, we feed
on flesh, fish, and fowl, catching some, and bringing up others. We
subdue four-footed beasts for our carriage, whose speed and strength
supply our slowness and inability. On some we put burdens, on others
yokes. We convert the sagacity of the elephant and the quick scent of
the dog to our own advantage. Out of the caverns of the earth we dig
iron, a thing entirely necessary for the cultivation of the ground. We
discover the hidden veins of copper, silver, and gold, advantageous for
our use and beautiful as ornaments. We cut down trees, and use every
kind of wild and cultivated timber, not only to make fire to warm us and
dress our meat, but also for building, that we may have houses to defend
us from the heat and cold. With timber likewise we build ships, which
bring us from all parts every commodity of life. We are the only animals
who, from our knowledge of navigation, can manage what nature has made
the most violent—the sea and the winds. Thus we obtain from the ocean
great numbers of profitable things. We are the absolute masters of what
the earth produces. We enjoy the mountains and the plains. The rivers
and the lakes are ours. We sow the seed, and plant the trees. We
fertilize the earth by overflowing it. We stop, direct, and turn the
rivers: in short, by our hands we endeavor, by our various operations in
this world, to make, as it were, another nature.</p>
<p>LXI. But what shall I say of human reason? Has it not even entered the
heavens? Man alone of all animals has observed the courses of the stars,
their risings and settings. By man the day, the month, the year, is
determined. He foresees the eclipses of the sun and moon, and foretells
them to futurity, marking their greatness, duration, and precise time.
&gt;From the contemplation of these things the mind extracts the knowledge
of the Gods—a knowledge which produces piety, with which is connected
justice, and all the other virtues; from which arises a life of
felicity, inferior to that of the Gods in no single particular, except
in immortality, which is not absolutely necessary <a id="page-314"/><span class="pgnum">314</span>to happy living. In
explaining these things, I think that I have sufficiently demonstrated
the superiority of man to other animated beings; from whence we should
infer that neither the form and position of his limbs nor that strength
of mind and understanding could possibly be the effect of chance.</p>
<p>LXII. I am now to prove, by way of conclusion, that every thing in this
world of use to us was made designedly for us.</p>
<p>First of all, the universe was made for the Gods and men, and all things
therein were prepared and provided for our service. For the world is the
common habitation or city of the Gods and men; for they are the only
reasonable beings: they alone live by justice and law. As, therefore, it
must be presumed the cities of Athens and Lacedæmon were built for the
Athenians and Lacedæmonians, and as everything there is said to belong
to those people, so everything in the universe may with propriety be
said to belong to the Gods and men, and to them alone.</p>
<p>In the next place, though the revolutions of the sun, moon, and all the
stars are necessary for the cohesion of the universe, yet may they be
considered also as objects designed for the view and contemplation of
man. There is no sight less apt to satiate the eye, none more beautiful,
or more worthy to employ our reason and penetration. By measuring their
courses we find the different seasons, their durations and vicissitudes,
which, if they are known to men alone, we must believe were made only
for their sake.</p>
<p>Does the earth bring forth fruit and grain in such excessive abundance
and variety for men or for brutes? The plentiful and exhilarating fruit
of the vine and the olive-tree are entirely useless to beasts. They know
not the time for sowing, tilling, or for reaping in season and gathering
in the fruits of the earth, or for laying up and preserving their
stores. Man alone has the care and advantage of these things.</p>
<p>LXIII. Thus, as the lute and the pipe were made for those, and those
only, who are capable of playing on them, so it must be allowed that the
produce of the earth was designed for those only who make use of them;
and <a id="page-315"/><span class="pgnum">315</span>though some beasts may rob us of a small part, it does not follow
that the earth produced it also for them. Men do not store up corn for
mice and ants, but for their wives, their children, and their families.
Beasts, therefore, as I said before, possess it by stealth, but their
masters openly and freely. It is for us, therefore, that nature hath
provided this abundance. Can there be any doubt that this plenty and
variety of fruit, which delight not only the taste, but the smell and
sight, was by nature intended for men only? Beasts are so far from being
partakers of this design, that we see that even they themselves were
made for man; for of what utility would sheep be, unless for their wool,
which, when dressed and woven, serves us for clothing? For they are not
capable of anything, not even of procuring their own food, without the
care and assistance of man. The fidelity of the dog, his affectionate
fawning on his master, his aversion to strangers, his sagacity in
finding game, and his vivacity in pursuit of it, what do these qualities
denote but that he was created for our use? Why need I mention oxen? We
perceive that their backs were not formed for carrying burdens, but
their necks were naturally made for the yoke, and their strong broad
shoulders to draw the plough. In the Golden Age, which poets speak of,
they were so greatly beneficial to the husbandman in tilling the fallow
ground that no violence was ever offered them, and it was even thought a
crime to eat them:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The Iron Age began the fatal trade</p>
<p>Of blood, and hammer’d the destructive blade;</p>
<p>Then men began to make the ox to bleed,</p>
<p>And on the tamed and docile beast to feed<a id="FNA-238"/><a href="#FN-238" class="pginternal"><sup>238</sup></a>.</p>
</div>
<p>LXIV. It would take a long time to relate the advantages which we
receive from mules and asses, which undoubtedly were designed for our
use. What is the swine good for but to eat? whose life, Chrysippus says,
was given it but as salt<a id="FNA-239"/><a href="#FN-239" class="pginternal"><sup>239</sup></a> to keep it from putrefying; and as it <a id="page-316"/><span class="pgnum">316</span>is
proper food for man, nature hath made no animal more fruitful. What a
multitude of birds and fishes are taken by the art and contrivance of
man only, and which are so delicious to our taste that one would be
tempted sometimes to believe that this Providence which watches over us
was an Epicurean! Though we think there are some birds—the alites and
oscines<a id="FNA-240"/><a href="#FN-240" class="pginternal"><sup>240</sup></a>, as our augurs call them—which were made merely to
foretell events.</p>
<p>The large savage beasts we take by hunting, partly for food, partly to
exercise ourselves in imitation of martial discipline, and to use those
we can tame and instruct, as elephants, or to extract remedies for our
diseases and wounds, as we do from certain roots and herbs, the virtues
of which are known by long use and experience. Represent to yourself the
whole earth and seas as if before your eyes. You will see the vast and
fertile plains, the thick, shady mountains, the immense pasturage for
cattle, and ships sailing over the deep with incredible celerity; nor
are our discoveries only on the face of the earth, but in its secret
recesses there are many useful things, which being made for man, by man
alone are discovered.</p>
<p>LXV. Another, and in my opinion the strongest, proof that the providence
of the Gods takes care of us is divination, which both of you, perhaps,
will attack; you, Cotta, because Carneades took pleasure in inveighing
against the Stoics; and you, Velleius, because there is nothing Epicurus
ridicules so much as the prediction of events. Yet the truth of
divination appears in many places, on many occasions, often in private,
but particularly in public concerns. We receive many intimations from
the foresight and presages of augurs and auspices; from oracles,
prophecies, dreams, and prodigies; and it often happens that by these
means events have proved happy to men, and imminent dangers have been
avoided. This knowledge, therefore—call it either a kind of transport,
or an art, or a natural faculty—is certainly found only in men, and is
a gift from the immortal Gods. If these proofs, when taken <a id="page-317"/><span class="pgnum">317</span>separately,
should make no impression upon your mind, yet, when collected together,
they must certainly affect you.</p>
<p>Besides, the Gods not only provide for mankind universally, but for
particular men. You may bring this universality to gradually a smaller
number, and again you may reduce that smaller number to individuals.</p>
<p>LXVI. For if the reasons which I have given prove to all of us that the
Gods take care of all men, in every country, in every part of the world
separate from our continent, they take care of those who dwell on the
same land with us, from east to west; and if they regard those who
inhabit this kind of great island, which we call the globe of the earth,
they have the like regard for those who possess the parts of this
island—Europe, Asia, and Africa; and therefore they favor the parts of
these parts, as Rome, Athens, Sparta, and Rhodes; and particular men of
these cities, separate from the whole; as Curius, Fabricius,
Coruncanius, in the war with Pyrrhus; in the first Punic war, Calatinus,
Duillius, Metellus, Lutatius; in the second, Maximus, Marcellus,
Africanus; after these, Paullus, Gracchus, Cato; and in our fathers’
times, Scipio, Lælius. Rome also and Greece have produced many
illustrious men, who we cannot believe were so without the assistance of
the Deity; which is the reason that the poets, Homer in particular,
joined their chief heroes—Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomedes, Achilles—to
certain Deities, as companions in their adventures and dangers. Besides,
the frequent appearances of the Gods, as I have before mentioned,
demonstrate their regard for cities and particular men. This is also
apparent indeed from the foreknowledge of events, which we receive
either sleeping or waking. We are likewise forewarned of many things by
the entrails of victims, by presages, and many other means, which have
been long observed with such exactness as to produce an art of
divination.</p>
<p>There never, therefore, was a great man without divine inspiration. If a
storm should damage the corn or vineyard of a person, or any accident
should deprive him of some conveniences of life, we should not judge
from thence that the Deity hates or neglects him. The Gods take care <a id="page-318"/><span class="pgnum">318</span>of
great things, and disregard the small. But to truly great men all things
ever happen prosperously; as has been sufficiently asserted and proved
by us Stoics, as well as by Socrates, the prince of philosophers, in his
discourses on the infinite advantages arising from virtue.</p>
<p>LXVII. This is almost the whole that hath occurred to my mind on the
nature of the Gods, and what I thought proper to advance. Do you, Cotta,
if I may advise, defend the same cause. Remember that in Rome you keep
the first rank; remember that you are Pontifex; and as your school is at
liberty to argue on which side you please<a id="FNA-241"/><a href="#FN-241" class="pginternal"><sup>241</sup></a>, do you rather take mine,
and reason on it with that eloquence which you acquired by your
rhetorical exercises, and which the Academy improved; for it is a
pernicious and impious custom to argue against the Gods, whether it be
done seriously, or only in pretence and out of sport.</p>
<hr/>
<h3>BOOK III.</h3>
<p>I. <span class="first">When</span> Balbus had ended this discourse, then Cotta, with a smile,
rejoined, You direct me too late which side to defend; for during the
course of your argument I was revolving in my mind what objections to
make to what you were saying, not so much for the sake of opposition, as
of obliging you to explain what I did not perfectly comprehend; and as
every one may use his own judgment, it is scarcely possible for me to
think in every instance exactly what you wish.</p>
<p>You have no idea, O Cotta, said Velleius, how impatient I am to hear
what you have to say. For since our friend Balbus was highly delighted
with your discourse against Epicurus, I ought in my turn to be
solicitous to hear what you can say against the Stoics; and I therefore
will give you my best attention, for I believe you are, as usual, well
prepared for the engagement.</p>
<p>I wish, by Hercules! I were, replies Cotta; for it is more difficult to
dispute with Lucilius than it was with you. <a id="page-319"/><span class="pgnum">319</span>Why so? says Velleius.
Because, replies Cotta, your Epicurus, in my opinion, does not contend
strongly for the Gods: he only, for the sake of avoiding any
unpopularity or punishment, is afraid to deny their existence; for when
he asserts that the Gods are wholly inactive and regardless of
everything, and that they have limbs like ours, but make no use of them,
he seems to jest with us, and to think it sufficient if he allows that
there are beings of any kind happy and eternal. But with regard to
Balbus, I suppose you observed how many things were said by him, which,
however false they may be, yet have a perfect coherence and connection;
therefore, my design, as I said, in opposing him, is not so much to
confute his principles as to induce him to explain what I do not clearly
understand: for which reason, Balbus, I will give you the choice, either
to answer me every particular as I go on, or permit me to proceed
without interruption. If you want any explanation, replies Balbus, I
would rather you would propose your doubts singly; but if your intention
is rather to confute me than to seek instruction for yourself, it shall
be as you please; I will either answer you immediately on every point,
or stay till you have finished your discourse.</p>
<p>II. Very well, says Cotta; then let us proceed as our conversation shall
direct. But before I enter on the subject, I have a word to say
concerning myself; for I am greatly influenced by your authority, and
your exhortation at the conclusion of your discourse, when you desired
me to remember that I was Cotta and Pontifex; by which I presume you
intimated that I should defend the sacred rites and religion and
ceremonies which we received from our ancestors. Most undoubtedly I
always have, and always shall defend them, nor shall the arguments
either of the learned or unlearned ever remove the opinions which I have
imbibed from them concerning the worship of the immortal Gods. In
matters of religion I submit to the rules of the high-priests, T.
Coruncanius, P. Scipio, and P. Scævola; not to the sentiments of Zeno,
Cleanthes, or Chrysippus; and I pay a greater regard to what C. Lælius,
one of our augurs and wise men, has written concerning religion, in that
noble oration of his, than to the most eminent of the Stoics: and as the
whole religion of the Romans at <a id="page-320"/><span class="pgnum">320</span>first consisted in sacrifices and
divination by birds, to which have since been added predictions, if the
interpreters<a id="FNA-242"/><a href="#FN-242" class="pginternal"><sup>242</sup></a> of the Sibylline oracle or the aruspices have foretold
any event from portents and prodigies, I have ever thought that there
was no point of all these holy things which deserved to be despised. I
have been even persuaded that Romulus, by instituting divination, and
Numa, by establishing sacrifices, laid the foundation of Rome, which
undoubtedly would never have risen to such a height of grandeur if the
Gods had not been made propitious by this worship. These, Balbus, are my
sentiments both as a priest and as Cotta. But you must bring me to your
opinion by the force of your reason: for I have a right to demand from
you, as a philosopher, a reason for the religion which you would have me
embrace. But I must believe the religion of our ancestors without any
proof.</p>
<p>III. What proof, says Balbus, do you require of me? You have proposed,
says Cotta, four articles. First of all, you undertook to prove that
there “are Gods;” secondly, “of what kind and character they are;”
thirdly, that “the universe is governed by them;” lastly, that “they
provide for the welfare of mankind in particular.” Thus, if I remember
rightly, you divided your discourse. Exactly so, replies Balbus; but let
us see what you require.</p>
<p>Let us examine, says Cotta, every proposition. The first one—that there
are Gods—is never contested but by the most impious of men; nay, though
it can never be rooted out of my mind, yet I believe it on the authority
of our ancestors, and not on the proofs which you have brought. Why do
you expect a proof from me, says Balbus, if you thoroughly believe it?
Because, says Cotta, I come to this discussion as if I had never thought
of the Gods, or heard anything concerning them. Take me as a disciple
wholly ignorant and unbiassed, and prove to me all the points which I
ask.</p>
<p>Begin, then, replies Balbus. I would first know, says Cotta, why you
have been so long in proving the existence of the Gods, which you said
was a point so very evident to all, that there was no need of any proof?
In that, answers <a id="page-321"/><span class="pgnum">321</span>Balbus, I have followed your example, whom I have
often observed, when pleading in the Forum, to load the judge with all
the arguments which the nature of your cause would permit. This also is
the practice of philosophers, and I have a right to follow it. Besides,
you may as well ask me why I look upon you with two eyes, since I can
see you with one.</p>
<p>IV. You shall judge, then, yourself, says Cotta, if this is a very just
comparison; for, when I plead, I do not dwell upon any point agreed to
be self-evident, because long reasoning only serves to confound the
clearest matters; besides, though I might take this method in pleading,
yet I should not make use of it in such a discourse as this, which
requires the nicest distinction. And with regard to your making use of
one eye only when you look on me, there is no reason for it, since
together they have the same view; and since nature, to which you
attribute wisdom, has been pleased to give us two passages by which we
receive light. But the truth is, that it was because you did not think
that the existence of the Gods was so evident as you could wish that you
therefore brought so many proofs. It was sufficient for me to believe it
on the tradition of our ancestors; and since you disregard authorities,
and appeal to reason, permit my reason to defend them against yours. The
proofs on which you found the existence of the Gods tend only to render
a proposition doubtful that, in my opinion, is not so; I have not only
retained in my memory the whole of these proofs, but even the order in
which you proposed them. The first was, that when we lift up our eyes
towards the heavens, we immediately conceive that there is some divinity
that governs those celestial bodies; on which you quoted this passage—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Look up to the refulgent heaven above,</p>
<p>Which all men call, unanimously, Jove;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">intimating that we should invoke that as Jupiter, rather than our
Capitoline Jove<a id="FNA-243"/><a href="#FN-243" class="pginternal"><sup>243</sup></a>, or that it is evident to the whole world that
those bodies are Gods which Velleius and many others do not place even
in the rank of animated beings.</p>
<p><a id="page-322"/><span class="pgnum">322</span>Another strong proof, in your opinion, was that the belief of the
existence of the Gods was universal, and that mankind was daily more and
more convinced of it. What! should an affair of such importance be left
to the decision of fools, who, by your sect especially, are called
madmen?</p>
<p>V. But the Gods have appeared to us, as to Posthumius at the Lake
Regillus, and to Vatienus in the Salarian Way: something you mentioned,
too, I know not what, of a battle of the Locrians at Sagra. Do you
believe that the Tyndaridæ, as you called them; that is, men sprung from
men, and who were buried in Lacedæmon, as we learn from Homer, who lived
in the next age—do you believe, I say, that they appeared to Vatienus
on the road mounted on white horses, without any servant to attend them,
to tell the victory of the Romans to a country fellow rather than to M.
Cato, who was at that time the chief person of the senate? Do you take
that print of a horse’s hoof which is now to be seen on a stone at
Regillus to be made by Castor’s horse? Should you not believe, what is
probable, that the souls of eminent men, such as the Tyndaridæ, are
divine and immortal, rather than that those bodies which had been
reduced to ashes should mount on horses, and fight in an army? If you
say that was possible, you ought to show how it is so, and not amuse us
with fabulous old women’s stories.</p>
<p>Do you take these for fabulous stories? says Balbus. Is not the temple,
built by Posthumius in honor of Castor and Pollux, to be seen in the
Forum? Is not the decree of the senate concerning Vatienus still
subsisting? As to the affair of Sagra, it is a common proverb among the
Greeks; when they would affirm anything strongly, they say “It is as
certain as what passed at Sagra.” Ought not such authorities to move
you? You oppose me, replies Cotta, with stories, but I ask reasons of
you<a id="FNA-244"/><a href="#FN-244" class="pginternal"><sup>244</sup></a>. * * *</p>
<p>VI. We are now to speak of predictions. No one can avoid what is to
come, and, indeed, it is commonly useless to know it; for it is a
miserable case to be afflicted to no purpose, and not to have even the
last, the common comfort, <a id="page-323"/><span class="pgnum">323</span>hope, which, according to your principles,
none can have; for you say that fate governs all things, and call that
fate which has been true from all eternity. What advantage, then, is the
knowledge of futurity to us, or how does it assist us to guard against
impending evils, since it will come inevitably?</p>
<p>But whence comes that divination? To whom is owing that knowledge from
the entrails of beasts? Who first made observations from the voice of
the crow? Who invented the Lots?<a id="FNA-245"/><a href="#FN-245" class="pginternal"><sup>245</sup></a> Not that I give no credit to these
things, or that I despise Attius Navius’s staff, which you mentioned;
but I ought to be informed how these things are understood by
philosophers, especially as the diviners are often wrong in their
conjectures. But physicians, you say, are likewise often mistaken. What
comparison can there be between divination, of the origin of which we
are ignorant, and physic, which proceeds on principles intelligible to
every one? You believe that the Decii,<a id="FNA-246"/><a href="#FN-246" class="pginternal"><sup>246</sup></a> in devoting themselves to
death, appeased the Gods. How great, then, was the iniquity of the Gods
that they could not be appeased but at the price of such noble blood!
That was the stratagem of generals such as the Greeks call <span class="greek">στρατήγημα</span>,
and it was a stratagem worthy such illustrious leaders, who consulted
the public good even at the expense of their lives: they conceived
rightly, what indeed happened, that if the general rode furiously upon
the enemy, the whole army would follow his example. As to the voice of
the Fauns, I never heard it. If you assure me that you have, I shall
believe you, though I really know not what a Faun is.</p>
<p>VII. I do not, then, O Balbus, from anything that you have said,
perceive as yet that it is proved that there are Gods. I believe it,
indeed, but not from any arguments of the Stoics. Cleanthes, you have
said, attributes the idea that men have of the Gods to four causes. In
the first place (as I have already sufficiently mentioned), to a
foreknowledge <a id="page-324"/><span class="pgnum">324</span>of future events; secondly, to tempests, and other shocks
of nature; thirdly, to the utility and plenty of things we enjoy;
fourthly, to the invariable order of the stars and the heavens. The
arguments drawn from foreknowledge I have already answered. With regard
to tempests in the air, the sea, and the earth, I own that many people
are affrighted by them, and imagine that the immortal Gods are the
authors of them.</p>
<p>But the question is, not whether there are people who believe that there
are Gods, but whether there are Gods or not. As to the two other causes
of Cleanthes, one of which is derived from the great abundance of
desirable things which we enjoy, the other from the invariable order of
the seasons and the heavens, I shall treat on them when I answer your
discourse concerning the providence of the Gods—a point, Balbus, upon
which you have spoken at great length. I shall likewise defer till then
examining the argument which you attribute to Chrysippus, that “if there
is in nature anything which surpasses the power of man to produce, there
must consequently be some being better than man.” I shall also postpone,
till we come to that part of my argument, your comparison of the world
to a fine house, your observations on the proportion and harmony of the
universe, and those smart, short reasons of Zeno which you quote; and I
shall examine at the same time your reasons drawn from natural
philosophy, concerning that fiery force and that vital heat which you
regard as the principle of all things; and I will investigate, in its
proper place, all that you advanced the other day on the existence of
the Gods, and on the sense and understanding which you attributed to the
sun, the moon, and all the stars; and I shall ask you this question over
and over again, By what proofs are you convinced yourself there are
Gods?</p>
<p>VIII. I thought, says Balbus, that I had brought ample proofs to
establish this point. But such is your manner of opposing, that, when
you seem on the point of interrogating me, and when I am preparing to
answer, you suddenly divert the discourse, and give me no opportunity to
reply to you; and thus those most important points concerning divination
and fate are neglected which we Stoics <a id="page-325"/><span class="pgnum">325</span>have thoroughly examined, but
which your school has only slightly touched upon. But they are not
thought essential to the question in hand; therefore, if you think
proper, do not confuse them together, that we in this discussion may
come to a clear explanation of the subject of our present inquiry.</p>
<p>Very well, says Cotta. Since, then, you have divided the whole question
into four parts, and I have said all that I had to say on the first, I
will take the second into consideration; in which, when you attempted to
show what the character of the Gods was, you seemed to me rather to
prove that there are none; for you said that it was the greatest
difficulty to draw our minds from the prepossessions of the eyes; but
that as nothing is more excellent than the Deity, you did not doubt that
the world was God, because there is nothing better in nature than the
world, and so we may reasonably think it animated, or, rather, perceive
it in our minds as clearly as if it were obvious to our eyes.</p>
<p>Now, in what sense do you say there is nothing better than the world? If
you mean that there is nothing more beautiful, I agree with you; that
there is nothing more adapted to our wants, I likewise agree with you:
but if you mean that nothing is wiser than the world, I am by no means
of your opinion. Not that I find it difficult to conceive anything in my
mind independent of my eyes; on the contrary, the more I separate my
mind from my eyes, the less I am able to comprehend your opinion.</p>
<p>IX. Nothing is better than the world, you say. Nor is there, indeed,
anything on earth better than the city of Rome; do you think, therefore,
that our city has a mind; that it thinks and reasons; or that this most
beautiful city, being void of sense, is not preferable to an ant,
because an ant has sense, understanding, reason, and memory? You should
consider, Balbus, what ought to be allowed you, and not advance things
because they please you.</p>
<p>For that old, concise, and, as it seemed to you, acute syllogism of Zeno
has been all which you have so much enlarged upon in handling this
topic: “That which reasons is superior to that which does not; nothing
is superior to the world; therefore the world reasons.” If you would
<a id="page-326"/><span class="pgnum">326</span>prove also that the world can very well read a book, follow the example
of Zeno, and say, “That which can read is better than that which cannot;
nothing is better than the world; the world therefore can read.” After
the same manner you may prove the world to be an orator, a
mathematician, a musician—that it possesses all sciences, and, in
short, is a philosopher. You have often said that God made all things,
and that no cause can produce an effect unlike itself. From hence it
will follow, not only that the world is animated, and is wise, but also
plays upon the fiddle and the flute, because it produces men who play on
those instruments. Zeno, therefore, the chief of your sect, advances no
argument sufficient to induce us to think that the world reasons, or,
indeed, that it is animated at all, and consequently none to think it a
Deity; though it may be said that there is nothing superior to it, as
there is nothing more beautiful, nothing more useful to us, nothing more
adorned, and nothing more regular in its motions. But if the world,
considered as one great whole, is not God, you should not surely deify,
as you have done, that infinite multitude of stars which only form a
part of it, and which so delight you with the regularity of their
eternal courses; not but that there is something truly wonderful and
incredible in their regularity; but this regularity of motion, Balbus,
may as well be ascribed to a natural as to a divine cause.</p>
<p>X. What can be more regular than the flux and reflux of the Euripus at
Chalcis, the Sicilian sea, and the violence of the ocean in those
parts<a id="FNA-247"/><a href="#FN-247" class="pginternal"><sup>247</sup></a></p>
<div class="poem">
<p class="L6" style="margin-left: 15ex">where the rapid tide</p>
<p>Does Europe from the Libyan coast divide?</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">The same appears on the Spanish and British coasts. Must we conclude
that some Deity appoints and directs these ebbings and flowings to
certain fixed times? Consider, I pray, if everything which is regular in
its motion is deemed divine, whether it will not follow that tertian and
quartan agues must likewise be so, as their returns have the greatest
regularity. These effects are to be explained by reason; but, because
you are unable to assign any, you have recourse to a Deity as your last
refuge.</p>
<p><a id="page-327"/><span class="pgnum">327</span>The arguments of Chrysippus appeared to you of great weight; a
man undoubtedly of great quickness and subtlety (I call those quick who
have a sprightly turn of thought, and those subtle whose minds are
seasoned by use as their hands are by labor): “If,” says he, “there is
anything which is beyond the power of man to produce, the being who
produces it is better than man. Man is unable to make what is in the
world; the being, therefore, that could do it is superior to man. What
being is there but a God superior to man? Therefore there is a God.”</p>
<p>These arguments are founded on the same erroneous principles as Zeno’s,
for he does not define what is meant by being better or more excellent,
or distinguish between an intelligent cause and a natural cause.
Chrysippus adds, “If there are no Gods, there is nothing better than
man; but we cannot, without the highest arrogance, have this idea of
ourselves.” Let us grant that it is arrogance in man to think himself
better than the world; but to comprehend that he has understanding and
reason, and that in Orion and Canicula there is neither, is no
arrogance, but an indication of good sense. “Since we suppose,”
continues he, “when we see a beautiful house, that it was built for the
master, and not for mice, we should likewise judge that the world is the
mansion of the Gods.” Yes, if I believed that the Gods built the world;
but not if, as I believe, and intend to prove, it is the work of nature.</p>
<p>XI. Socrates, in Xenophon, asks, “Whence had man his understanding, if
there was none in the world?” And I ask, Whence had we speech, harmony,
singing; unless we think it is the sun conversing with the moon when she
approaches near it, or that the world forms an harmonious concert, as
Pythagoras imagines? This, Balbus, is the effect of nature; not of that
nature which proceeds artificially, as Zeno says, and the character of
which I shall presently examine into, but a nature which, by its own
proper motions and mutations, modifies everything.</p>
<p>For I readily agree to what you said about the harmony and general
agreement of nature, which you pronounced to be firmly bound and united
together, as it were, by ties of blood; but I do not approve of what you
added, that “it could not possibly be so, unless it were so united by
<a id="page-328"/><span class="pgnum">328</span>one divine spirit.” On the contrary, the whole subsists by the power of
nature, independently of the Gods, and there is a kind of sympathy (as
the Greeks call it) which joins together all the parts of the universe;
and the greater that is in its own power, the less is it necessary to
have recourse to a divine intelligence.</p>
<p>XII. But how will you get rid of the objections which Carneades made?
“If,” says he, “there is no body immortal, there is none eternal; but
there is no body immortal, nor even indivisible, or that cannot be
separated and disunited; and as every animal is in its nature passive,
so there is not one which is not subject to the impressions of
extraneous bodies; none, that is to say, which can avoid the necessity
of enduring and suffering: and if every animal is mortal, there is none
immortal; so, likewise, if every animal may be cut up and divided, there
is none indivisible, none eternal, but all are liable to be affected by,
and compelled to submit to, external power. Every animal, therefore, is
necessarily mortal, dissoluble, and divisible.”</p>
<p>For as there is no wax, no silver, no brass which cannot be converted
into something else, whatever is composed of wax, or silver, or brass
may cease to be what it is. By the same reason, if all the elements are
mutable, every body is mutable.</p>
<p>Now, according to your doctrine, all the elements are mutable; all
bodies, therefore, are mutable. But if there were any body immortal,
then all bodies would not be mutable. Every body, then, is mortal; for
every body is either water, air, fire, or earth, or composed of the four
elements together, or of some of them. Now, there is not one of all
these elements that does not perish; for earthly bodies are fragile:
water is so soft that the least shock will separate its parts, and fire
and air yield to the least impulse, and are subject to dissolution;
besides, any of these elements perish when converted into another
nature, as when water is formed from earth, the air from water, and the
sky from air, and when they change in the same manner back again.
Therefore, if there is nothing but what is perishable in the composition
of all animals, there is no animal eternal.</p>
<p>XIII. But, not to insist on these arguments, there is no <a id="page-329"/><span class="pgnum">329</span>animal to be
found that had not a beginning, and will not have an end; for every
animal being sensitive, they are consequently all sensible of cold and
heat, sweet and bitter; nor can they have pleasing sensations without
being subject to the contrary. As, therefore, they receive pleasure,
they likewise receive pain; and whatever being is subject to pain must
necessarily be subject to death. It must be allowed, therefore, that
every animal is mortal.</p>
<p>Besides, a being that is not sensible of pleasure or pain cannot have
the essence of an animal; if, then, on the one hand, every animal must
be sensible of pleasure and pain, and if, on the other, every being that
has these sensations cannot be immortal, we may conclude that as there
is no animal insensible, there is none immortal. Besides, there is no
animal without inclination and aversion—an inclination to that which is
agreeable to nature, and an aversion to the contrary: there are in the
case of every animal some things which they covet, and others they
reject. What they reject are repugnant to their nature, and consequently
would destroy them. Every animal, therefore, is inevitably subject to be
destroyed. There are innumerable arguments to prove that whatever is
sensitive is perishable; for cold, heat, pleasure, pain, and all that
affects the sense, when they become excessive, cause destruction. Since,
then, there is no animal that is not sensitive, there is none immortal.</p>
<p>XIV. The substance of an animal is either simple or compound; simple, if
it is composed only of earth, of fire, of air, or of water (and of such
a sort of being we can form no idea); compound, if it is formed of
different elements, which have each their proper situation, and have a
natural tendency to it—this element tending towards the highest parts,
that towards the lowest, and another towards the middle. This
conjunction may for some time subsist, but not forever; for every
element must return to its first situation. No animal, therefore, is
eternal.</p>
<p>But your school, Balbus, allows fire only to be the sole active
principle; an opinion which I believe you derive from Heraclitus, whom
some men understand in one sense, some in another: but since he seems
unwilling to be understood, we will pass him by. You Stoics, then, say
that <a id="page-330"/><span class="pgnum">330</span>fire is the universal principle of all things; that all living
bodies cease to live on the extinction of that heat; and that throughout
all nature whatever is sensible of that heat lives and flourishes. Now,
I cannot conceive that bodies should perish for want of heat, rather
than for want of moisture or air, especially as they even die through
excess of heat; so that the life of animals does not depend more on fire
than on the other elements.</p>
<p>However, air and water have this quality in common with fire and heat.
But let us see to what this tends. If I am not mistaken, you believe
that in all nature there is nothing but fire, which is self-animated.
Why fire rather than air, of which the life of animals consists, and
which is called from thence <i>anima</i>,<a id="FNA-248"/><a href="#FN-248" class="pginternal"><sup>248</sup></a> the soul? But how is it that
you take it for granted that life is nothing but fire? It seems more
probable that it is a compound of fire and air. But if fire is
self-animated, unmixed with any other element, it must be sensitive,
because it renders our bodies sensitive; and the same objection which I
just now made will arise, that whatever is sensitive must necessarily be
susceptible of pleasure and pain, and whatever is sensible of pain is
likewise subject to the approach of death; therefore you cannot prove
fire to be eternal.</p>
<p>You Stoics hold that all fire has need of nourishment, without which it
cannot possibly subsist; that the sun, moon, and all the stars are fed
either with fresh or salt waters; and the reason that Cleanthes gives
why the sun is retrograde, and does not go beyond the tropics in the
summer or winter, is that he may not be too far from his sustenance.
This I shall fully examine hereafter; but at present we may conclude
that whatever may cease to be cannot of its own nature be eternal; that
if fire wants sustenance, it will cease to be, and that, therefore, fire
is not of its own nature eternal.</p>
<p>XV. After all, what kind of a Deity must that be who <a id="page-331"/><span class="pgnum">331</span>is not graced with
one single virtue, if we should succeed in forming this idea of such a
one? Must we not attribute prudence to a Deity? a virtue which consists
in the knowledge of things good, bad, and indifferent. Yet what need has
a being for the discernment of good and ill who neither has nor can have
any ill? Of what use is reason to him? of what use is understanding? We
men, indeed, find them useful to aid us in finding out things which are
obscure by those which are clear to us; but nothing can be obscure to a
Deity. As to justice, which gives to every one his own, it is not the
concern of the Gods; since that virtue, according to your doctrine,
received its birth from men and from civil society. Temperance consists
in abstinence from corporeal pleasures, and if such abstinence hath a
place in heaven, so also must the pleasures abstained from. Lastly, if
fortitude is ascribed to the Deity, how does it appear? In afflictions,
in labor, in danger? None of these things can affect a God. How, then,
can we conceive this to be a Deity that makes no use of reason, and is
not endowed with any virtue?</p>
<p>However, when I consider what is advanced by the Stoics, my contempt for
the ignorant multitude vanishes. For these are their divinities. The
Syrians worshipped a fish. The Egyptians consecrated beasts of almost
every kind. The Greeks deified many men; as Alabandus<a id="FNA-249"/><a href="#FN-249" class="pginternal"><sup>249</sup></a> at Alabandæ,
Tenes at Tenedos; and all Greece pay divine honors to Leucothea (who was
before called Ino), to her son Palæmon, to Hercules, to Æsculapius, and
to the Tyndaridæ; our own people to Romulus, and to many others, who, as
citizens newly admitted into the ancient body, they imagine have been
received into heaven.</p>
<p>These are the Gods of the illiterate.</p>
<p>XVI. What are the notions of you philosophers? In what respect are they
superior to these ideas? I shall pass them over; for they are certainly
very admirable. Let the world, then, be a Deity, for that, I conceive,
is what you mean by</p>
<div class="poem">
<p class="L4">The refulgent heaven above,</p>
<p>Which all men call, unanimously, Jove.</p>
</div>
<p><a id="page-332"/><span class="pgnum">332</span>But why are we to add many more Gods? What a multitude of them there
is! At least, it seems so to me; for every constellation, according to
you, is a Deity: to some you give the name of beasts, as the goat, the
scorpion, the bull, the lion; to others the names of inanimate things,
as the ship, the altar, the crown.</p>
<p>But supposing these were to be allowed, how can the rest be granted, or
even so much as understood? When we call corn Ceres, and wine Bacchus,
we make use of the common manner of speaking; but do you think any one
so mad as to believe that his food is a Deity? With regard to those who,
you say, from having been men became Gods, I should be very willing to
learn of you, either how it was possible formerly, or, if it had ever
been, why is it not so now? I do not conceive, as things are at present,
how Hercules,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Burn’d with fiery torches on Mount Œta,</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">as Accius says, should rise, with the flames,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>To the eternal mansions of his father.</p>
</div>
<p>Besides, Homer also says that Ulysses<a id="FNA-250"/><a href="#FN-250" class="pginternal"><sup>250</sup></a> met him in the shades below,
among the other dead.</p>
<p>But yet I should be glad to know which Hercules we should chiefly
worship; for they who have searched into those histories, which are but
little known, tell us of several. The most ancient is he who fought with
Apollo about the Tripos of Delphi, and is son of Jupiter and Lisyto; and
of the most ancient Jupiters too, for we find many Jupiters also in the
Grecian chronicles. The second is the Egyptian Hercules, and is believed
to be the son of Nilus, and to be the author of the Phrygian characters.
The third, to whom they offered sacrifices, is one of the <a id="page-333"/><span class="pgnum">333</span>Idæi
Dactyli.<a id="FNA-251"/><a href="#FN-251" class="pginternal"><sup>251</sup></a> The fourth is the son of Jupiter and Asteria, the sister
of Latona, chiefly honored by the Tyrians, who pretend that
Carthago<a id="FNA-252"/><a href="#FN-252" class="pginternal"><sup>252</sup></a> is his daughter. The fifth, called Belus, is worshipped in
India. The sixth is the son of Alcmena by Jupiter; but by the third
Jupiter, for there are many Jupiters, as you shall soon see.</p>
<p>XVII. Since this examination has led me so far, I will convince you that
in matters of religion I have learned more from the pontifical rites,
the customs of our ancestors, and the vessels of Numa,<a id="FNA-253"/><a href="#FN-253" class="pginternal"><sup>253</sup></a> which Lælius
mentions in his little Golden Oration, than from all the learning of the
Stoics; for tell me, if I were a disciple of your school, what answer
could I make to these questions? If there are Gods, are nymphs also
Goddesses? If they are Goddesses, are Pans and Satyrs in the same rank?
But they are not; consequently, nymphs are not Goddesses. Yet they have
temples publicly dedicated to them. What do you conclude from thence?
Others who have temples are not therefore Gods. But let us go on. You
call Jupiter and Neptune Gods; their brother Pluto, then, is one; and if
so, those rivers also are Deities which they say flow in the infernal
regions—Acheron, Cocytus, Pyriphlegethon; Charon also, and Cerberus,
are Gods; but that cannot be allowed; nor can Pluto be placed among the
Deities. What, then, will you say of his brothers?</p>
<p>Thus reasons Carneades; not with any design to destroy the existence of
the Gods (for what would less become a philosopher?), but to convince us
that on that matter the Stoics have said nothing plausible. If, then,
Jupiter and Neptune are Gods, adds he, can that divinity be denied to
their father Saturn, who is principally worshipped throughout the West?
If Saturn is a God, then must his father, Cœlus, be one too, and so must
the parents of Cœlus, which are the Sky and Day, as also their brothers
and sisters, which by ancient genealogists are <a id="page-334"/><span class="pgnum">334</span>thus named: Love,
Deceit, Fear, Labor, Envy, Fate, Old Age, Death, Darkness, Misery,
Lamentation, Favor, Fraud, Obstinacy, the Destinies, the Hesperides, and
Dreams; all which are the offspring of Erebus and Night. These monstrous
Deities, therefore, must be received, or else those from whom they
sprung must be disallowed.</p>
<p>XVIII. If you say that Apollo, Vulcan, Mercury, and the rest of that
sort are Gods, can you doubt the divinity of Hercules and Æsculapius,
Bacchus, Castor and Pollux? These are worshipped as much as those, and
even more in some places. Therefore they must be numbered among the
Gods, though on the mother’s side they are only of mortal race.
Aristæus, who is said to have been the son of Apollo, and to have found
out the art of making oil from the olive; Theseus, the son of Neptune;
and the rest whose fathers were Deities, shall they not be placed in the
number of the Gods? But what think you of those whose mothers were
Goddesses? They surely have a better title to divinity; for, in the
civil law, as he is a freeman who is born of a freewoman, so, in the law
of nature, he whose mother is a Goddess must be a God. The isle
Astypalæa religiously honor Achilles; and if he is a Deity, Orpheus and
Rhesus are so, who were born of one of the Muses; unless, perhaps, there
may be a privilege belonging to sea marriages which land marriages have
not. Orpheus and Rhesus are nowhere worshipped; and if they are
therefore not Gods, because they are nowhere worshipped as such, how can
the others be Deities? You, Balbus, seemed to agree with me that the
honors which they received were not from their being regarded as
immortals, but as men richly endued with virtue.</p>
<p>But if you think Latona a Goddess, how can you avoid admitting Hecate to
be one also, who was the daughter of Asteria, Latona’s sister? Certainly
she is one, if we may judge by the altars erected to her in Greece. And
if Hecate is a Goddess, how can you refuse that rank to the Eumenides?
for they also have a temple at Athens, and, if I understand right, the
Romans have consecrated a grove to them. The Furies, too, whom we look
upon as the inspectors into and scourges of impiety, I suppose, must
have their divinity too. As you hold that there is some divinity
<a id="page-335"/><span class="pgnum">335</span>presides over every human affair, there is one who presides over the
travail of matrons, whose name, <i>Natio</i>, is derived <i>a nascentibus</i>,
from nativities, and to whom we used to sacrifice in our processions in
the fields of Ardæa; but if she is a Deity, we must likewise acknowledge
all those you mentioned, Honor, Faith, Intellect, Concord; by the same
rule also, Hope, Juno, Moneta,<a id="FNA-254"/><a href="#FN-254" class="pginternal"><sup>254</sup></a> and every idle phantom, every child
of our imagination, are Deities. But as this consequence is quite
inadmissible, do not you either defend the cause from which it flows.</p>
<p>XIX. What say you to this? If these are Deities, which we worship and
regard as such, why are not Serapis and Isis<a id="FNA-255"/><a href="#FN-255" class="pginternal"><sup>255</sup></a> placed in the same
rank? And if they are admitted, what reason have we to reject the Gods
of the barbarians? Thus we should deify oxen, horses, the ibis, hawks,
asps, crocodiles, fishes, dogs, wolves, cats, and many other beasts. If
we go back to the source of this superstition, we must equally condemn
all the Deities from which they proceed. Shall Ino, whom the Greeks call
Leucothea, and we Matuta, be reputed a Goddess, because she was the
daughter of Cadmus, and shall that title be refused to Circe and
Pasiphae,<a id="FNA-256"/><a href="#FN-256" class="pginternal"><sup>256</sup></a> who had the sun for their father, and Perseis, daughter
of the Ocean, for their mother? It is true, Circe has divine honors paid
her by our colony of Circæum; therefore you call her a Goddess; but what
will you say of Medea, the granddaughter of the Sun and the Ocean, and
daughter of Æetes and Idyia? What will you say of her brother Absyrtus,
whom Pacuvius calls Ægialeus, though the other name is more frequent in
the writings of the ancients? If you did not deify one as well as the
other, what will become of Ino? for all these Deities have the same
origin.</p>
<p>Shall Amphiaraus and Tryphonius be called Gods? Our publicans, when some
lands in Bœotia were exempted from the tax, as belonging to the immortal
Gods, denied that <a id="page-336"/><span class="pgnum">336</span>any were immortal who had been men. But if you deify
these, Erechtheus surely is a God, whose temple and priest we have seen
at Athens. And can you, then, refuse to acknowledge also Codrus, and
many others who shed their blood for the preservation of their country?
And if it is not allowable to consider all these men as Gods, then,
certainly, probabilities are not in favor of our acknowledging the
<i>Divinity</i> of those previously mentioned beings from whom these have
proceeded.</p>
<p>It is easy to observe, likewise, that if in many countries people have
paid divine honors to the memory of those who have signalized their
courage, it was done in order to animate others to practise virtue, and
to expose themselves the more willingly to dangers in their country’s
cause. From this motive the Athenians have deified Erechtheus and his
daughters, and have erected also a temple, called Leocorion, to the
daughters of Leus.<a id="FNA-257"/><a href="#FN-257" class="pginternal"><sup>257</sup></a> Alabandus is more honored in the city which he
founded than any of the more illustrious Deities; from thence
Stratonicus had a pleasant turn—as he had many—when he was troubled
with an impertinent fellow who insisted that Alabandus was a God, but
that Hercules was not; “Very well,” says he, “then let the anger of
Alabandus fall upon me, and that of Hercules upon you.”</p>
<p>XX. Do you not consider, Balbus, to what lengths your arguments for the
divinity of the heaven and the stars will carry you? You deify the sun
and the moon, which the Greeks take to be Apollo and Diana. If the moon
is a Deity, the morning-star, the other planets, and all the fixed stars
are also Deities; and why shall not the rainbow be placed in that
number? for it is so wonderfully beautiful that it is justly said to be
the daughter of Thaumas.<a id="FNA-258"/><a href="#FN-258" class="pginternal"><sup>258</sup></a> But if you deify the rainbow, what regard
will you pay to the clouds? for the colors which appear in the bow are
only formed of the clouds, one of which is said to have brought forth
the Centaurs; and if you deify the clouds, you cannot pay less regard to
the seasons, which the Roman people have really consecrated. Tempests,
showers, <a id="page-337"/><span class="pgnum">337</span>storms, and whirlwinds must then be Deities. It is certain, at
least, that our captains used to sacrifice a victim to the waves before
they embarked on any voyage.</p>
<p>As you deify the earth under the name of Ceres,<a id="FNA-259"/><a href="#FN-259" class="pginternal"><sup>259</sup></a> because, as you
said, she bears fruits (<i>a gerendo</i>), and the ocean under that of
Neptune, rivers and fountains have the same right. Thus we see that
Maso, the conqueror of Corsica, dedicated a temple to a fountain, and
the names of the Tiber, Spino, Almo, Nodinus, and other neighboring
rivers are in the prayers<a id="FNA-260"/><a href="#FN-260" class="pginternal"><sup>260</sup></a> of the augurs. Therefore, either the
number of such Deities will be infinite, or we must admit none of them,
and wholly disapprove of such an endless series of superstition.</p>
<p>XXI. None of all these assertions, then, are to be admitted. I must
proceed now, Balbus, to answer those who say that, with regard to those
deified mortals, so religiously and devoutly reverenced, the public
opinion should have the force of reality. To begin, then: they who are
called theologists say that there are three Jupiters; the first and
second of whom were born in Arcadia; one of whom was the son of Æther,
and father of Proserpine and Bacchus; the other the son of Cœlus, and
father of Minerva, who is called the Goddess and inventress of war; the
third one born of Saturn in the isle of Crete,<a id="FNA-261"/><a href="#FN-261" class="pginternal"><sup>261</sup></a> where his sepulchre
is shown. The sons of Jupiter (<span class="greek">Διόσκουροι</span>) also, among the Greeks, have
many names; first, the three who at Athens have the title of
Anactes,<a id="FNA-262"/><a href="#FN-262" class="pginternal"><sup>262</sup></a> Tritopatreus, Eubuleus, and Dionysus, sons of the most
ancient king Jupiter and Proserpine; the next are Castor and Pollux,
sons of the third Jupiter and Leda; and, lastly, three others, by some
called Alco,<a id="FNA-263"/><a href="#FN-263" class="pginternal"><sup>263</sup></a> Melampus, and Tmolus, sons of Atreus, the son of
Pelops.</p>
<p><a id="page-338"/><span class="pgnum">338</span>As to the Muses, there were at first four—Thelxiope, Aœde, Arche, and
Melete—daughters of the second Jupiter; afterward there were nine,
daughters of the third Jupiter and Mnemosyne; there were also nine
others, having the same appellations, born of Pierus and Antiopa, by the
poets usually called Pierides and Pieriæ. Though <i>Sol</i> (the sun) is so
called, you say, because he is <i>solus</i> (single); yet how many suns do
theologists mention? There is one, the son of Jupiter and grandson of
Æther; another, the son of Hyperion; a third, who, the Egyptians say,
was of the city Heliopolis, sprung from Vulcan, the son of Nilus; a
fourth is said to have been born at Rhodes of Acantho, in the times of
the heroes, and was the grandfather of Jalysus, Camirus, and Lindus; a
fifth, of whom, it is pretended, Aretes and Circe were born at Colchis.</p>
<p>XXII. There are likewise several Vulcans. The first (who had of Minerva
that Apollo whom the ancient historians call the tutelary God of Athens)
was the son of Cœlus; the second, whom the Egyptians call Opas,<a id="FNA-264"/><a href="#FN-264" class="pginternal"><sup>264</sup></a> and
whom they looked upon as the protector of Egypt, is the son of Nilus;
the third, who is said to have been the master of the forges at Lemnos,
was the son of the third Jupiter and of Juno; the fourth, who possessed
the islands near Sicily called Vulcaniæ,<a id="FNA-265"/><a href="#FN-265" class="pginternal"><sup>265</sup></a> was the son of Menalius.
One Mercury had Cœlus for his father and Dies for his mother; another,
who is said to dwell in a cavern, and is the same as Trophonius, is the
son of Valens and Phoronis. A third, of whom, and of Penelope, Pan was
the offspring, is the son of the third Jupiter and Maia. A fourth, whom
the Egyptians think it a crime to name, is the son of Nilus. A fifth,
whom we call, in their language, Thoth, as with them the first month of
the year is called, is he whom the people of Pheneum<a id="FNA-266"/><a href="#FN-266" class="pginternal"><sup>266</sup></a> worship, and
who is said to have killed Argus, to have fled for it into Egypt, and to
have given laws and learning to the Egyptians. The first of the
Æsculapii, the God of Arcadia, who is said to have invented the probe
and to have been the first person who taught men to use bandages for
wounds, is the son of <a id="page-339"/><span class="pgnum">339</span>Apollo. The second, who was killed with thunder,
and is said to be buried in Cynosura,<a id="FNA-267"/><a href="#FN-267" class="pginternal"><sup>267</sup></a> is the brother of the second
Mercury. The third, who is said to have found out the art of purging the
stomach, and of drawing teeth, is the son of Arsippus and Arsinoe; and
in Arcadia there is shown his tomb, and the wood which is consecrated to
him, near the river Lusium.</p>
<p>XXIII. I have already spoken of the most ancient of the Apollos, who is
the son of Vulcan, and tutelar God of Athens. There is another, son of
Corybas, and native of Crete, for which island he is said to have
contended with Jupiter himself. A third, who came from the regions of
the Hyperborei<a id="FNA-268"/><a href="#FN-268" class="pginternal"><sup>268</sup></a> to Delphi, is the son of the third Jupiter and of
Latona. A fourth was of Arcadia, whom the Arcadians called Nomio,<a id="FNA-269"/><a href="#FN-269" class="pginternal"><sup>269</sup></a>
because they regarded him as their legislator. There are likewise many
Dianas. The first, who is thought to be the mother of the winged Cupid,
is the daughter of Jupiter and Proserpine. The second, who is more
known, is daughter of the third Jupiter and of Latona. The third, whom
the Greeks often call by her father’s name, is the daughter of Upis<a id="FNA-270"/><a href="#FN-270" class="pginternal"><sup>270</sup></a>
and Glauce. There are many also of the Dionysi. The first was the son of
Jupiter and Proserpine. The second, who is said to have killed Nysa, was
the son of Nilus. The third, who reigned in Asia, and for whom the
Sabazia<a id="FNA-271"/><a href="#FN-271" class="pginternal"><sup>271</sup></a> were instituted, was the son of Caprius. The fourth, for
whom they celebrate the Orphic festivals, sprung from Jupiter and Luna.
The fifth, who is supposed to have instituted the Trieterides, was the
son of Nysus and Thyone.</p>
<p>The first Venus, who has a temple at Elis, was the daughter of Cœlus and
Dies. The second arose out of the froth of the sea, and became, by
Mercury, the mother of the second Cupid. The third, the daughter of
Jupiter and Diana, was married to Vulcan, but is said to have had
Anteros by Mars. The fourth was a Syrian, born of Tyro, who is called
Astarte, and is said to have been married to <a id="page-340"/><span class="pgnum">340</span>Adonis. I have already
mentioned one Minerva, mother of Apollo. Another, who is worshipped at
Sais, a city in Egypt, sprung from Nilus. The third, whom I have also
mentioned, was daughter of Jupiter. The fourth, sprung from Jupiter and
Coryphe, the daughter of the Ocean; the Arcadians call her Coria, and
make her the inventress of chariots. A fifth, whom they paint with wings
at her heels, was daughter of Pallas, and is said to have killed her
father for endeavoring to violate her chastity. The first Cupid is said
to be the son of Mercury and the first Diana; the second, of Mercury and
the second Venus; the third, who is the same as Anteros, of Mars and the
third Venus.</p>
<p>All these opinions arise from old stories that were spread in Greece;
the belief in which, Balbus, you well know, ought to be stopped, lest
religion should suffer. But you Stoics, so far from refuting them, even
give them authority by the mysterious sense which you pretend to find in
them. Can you, then, think, after this plain refutation, that there is
need to employ more subtle reasonings? But to return from this
digression.</p>
<p>XXIV. We see that the mind, faith, hope, virtue, honor, victory, health,
concord, and things of such kind, are purely natural, and have nothing
of divinity in them; for either they are inherent in us, as the mind,
faith, hope, virtue, and concord are; or else they are to be desired, as
honor, health, and victory. I know indeed that they are useful to us,
and see that statues have been religiously erected for them; but as to
their divinity, I shall begin to believe it when you have proved it for
certain. Of this kind I may particularly mention Fortune, which is
allowed to be ever inseparable from inconstancy and temerity, which are
certainly qualities unworthy of a divine being.</p>
<p>But what delight do you take in the explication of fables, and in the
etymology of names?—that Cœlus was castrated by his son, and that
Saturn was bound in chains by his son! By your defence of these and such
like fictions you would make the authors of them appear not only not to
be madmen, but to have been even very wise. But the pains which you take
with your etymologies deserve our pity. That Saturn is so called because
<i>se saturat annis</i>, he is full of years; Mavors, Mars, because <i>magna
<a id="page-341"/><span class="pgnum">341</span>vortit</i>, he brings about mighty changes; Minerva, because <i>minuit</i>, she
diminishes, or because <i>minatur</i>, she threatens; Venus, because <i>venit
ad omnia</i>, she comes to all; Ceres, <i>a gerendo</i>, from bearing. How
dangerous is this method! for there are many names would puzzle you.
&gt;From what would you derive Vejupiter and Vulcan? Though, indeed, if you
can derive Neptune <i>a nando</i>, from swimming, in which you seem to me to
flounder about yourself more than Neptune, you may easily find the
origin of all names, since it is founded only upon the conformity of
some one letter. Zeno first, and after him Cleanthes and Chrysippus, are
put to the unnecessary trouble of explaining mere fables, and giving
reasons for the several appellations of every Deity; which is really
owning that those whom we call Gods are not the representations of
deities, but natural things, and that to judge otherwise is an error.</p>
<p>XXV. Yet this error has so much prevailed that even pernicious things
have not only the title of divinity ascribed to them, but have also
sacrifices offered to them; for Fever has a temple on the Palatine hill,
and Orbona another near that of the Lares, and we see on the Esquiline
hill an altar consecrated to Ill-fortune. Let all such errors be
banished from philosophy, if we would advance, in our dispute concerning
the immortal Gods, nothing unworthy of immortal beings. I know myself
what I ought to believe; which is far different from what you have said.
You take Neptune for an intelligence pervading the sea. You have the
same opinion of Ceres with regard to the earth. I cannot, I own, find
out, or in the least conjecture, what that intelligence of the sea or
the earth is. To learn, therefore, the existence of the Gods, and of
what description and character they are, I must apply elsewhere, not to
the Stoics.</p>
<p>Let us proceed to the two other parts of our dispute: first, “whether
there is a divine providence which governs the world;” and lastly,
“whether that providence particularly regards mankind;” for these are
the remaining propositions of your discourse; and I think that, if you
approve of it, we should examine these more accurately. With all my
heart, says Velleius, for I readily agree to what you have hitherto
said, and expect still greater things from you.</p>
<p>I am unwilling to interrupt you, says Balbus to Cotta, <a id="page-342"/><span class="pgnum">342</span>but we shall
take another opportunity, and I shall effectually convince you. But<a id="FNA-272"/><a href="#FN-272" class="pginternal"><sup>272</sup></a>
* * *</p>
<p class="nodist">XXVI.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Shall I adore, and bend the suppliant knee,</p>
<p>Who scorn their power and doubt their deity?</p>
</div>
<p>Does not Niobe here seem to reason, and by that reasoning to bring all
her misfortunes upon herself? But what a subtle expression is the
following!</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>On strength of will alone depends success;</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">a maxim capable of leading us into all that is bad.</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Though I’m confined, his malice yet is vain,</p>
<p>His tortured heart shall answer pain for pain;</p>
<p>His ruin soothe my soul with soft content,</p>
<p>Lighten my chains, and welcome banishment!</p>
</div>
<p>This, now, is reason; that reason which you say the divine goodness has
denied to the brute creation, kindly to bestow it on men alone. How
great, how immense the favor! Observe the same Medea flying from her
father and her country:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>The guilty wretch from her pursuer flies.</p>
<p>By her own hands the young Absyrtus slain,</p>
<p>His mangled limbs she scatters o’er the plain,</p>
<p>That the fond sire might sink beneath his woe,</p>
<p>And she to parricide her safety owe.</p>
</div>
<p>Reflection, as well as wickedness, must have been necessary to the
preparation of such a fact; and did he too, who prepared that fatal
repast for his brother, do it without reflection?</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Revenge as great as Atreus’ injury</p>
<p>Shall sink his soul and crown his misery.</p>
</div>
<p>XXVII. Did not Thyestes himself, not content with having defiled his
brother’s bed (of which Atreus with great justice thus complains,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>When faithless comforts, in the lewd embrace,</p>
<p>With vile adultery stain a royal race,</p>
<p>The blood thus mix’d in fouler currents flows,</p>
<p>Taints the rich soil, and breeds unnumber’d woes)—</p>
</div>
<p class="cont"><a id="page-343"/><span class="pgnum">343</span>did he not, I say, by that adultery, aim at the possession of the
crown? Atreus thus continues:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>A lamb, fair gift of heaven, with golden fleece,</p>
<p>Promised in vain to fix my crown in peace;</p>
<p>But base Thyestes, eager for the prey,</p>
<p>Crept to my bed, and stole the gem away.</p>
</div>
<p>Do you not perceive that Thyestes must have had a share of reason
proportionable to the greatness of his crimes—such crimes as are not
only represented to us on the stage, but such as we see committed, nay,
often exceeded, in the common course of life? The private houses of
individual citizens, the public courts, the senate, the camp, our
allies, our provinces, all agree that reason is the author of all the
ill, as well as of all the good, which is done; that it makes few act
well, and that but seldom, but many act ill, and that frequently; and
that, in short, the Gods would have shown greater benevolence in denying
us any reason at all than in sending us that which is accompanied with
so much mischief; for as wine is seldom wholesome, but often hurtful in
diseases, we think it more prudent to deny it to the patient than to run
the risk of so uncertain a remedy; so I do not know whether it would not
be better for mankind to be deprived of wit, thought, and penetration,
or what we call reason, since it is a thing pernicious to many and very
useful to few, than to have it bestowed upon them with so much
liberality and in such abundance. But if the divine will has really
consulted the good of man in this gift of reason, the good of those men
only was consulted on whom a well-regulated one is bestowed: how few
those are, if any, is very apparent. We cannot admit, therefore, that
the Gods consulted the good of a few only; the conclusion must be that
they consulted the good of none.</p>
<p>XXVIII. You answer that the ill use which a great part of mankind make
of reason no more takes away the goodness of the Gods, who bestow it as
a present of the greatest benefit to them, than the ill use which
children make of their patrimony diminishes the obligation which they
have to their parents for it. We grant you this; but where is the
similitude? It was far from Deianira’s design to injure Hercules when
she made him a present <a id="page-344"/><span class="pgnum">344</span>of the shirt dipped in the blood of the
Centaurs. Nor was it a regard to the welfare of Jason of Pheræ that
influenced the man who with his sword opened his imposthume, which the
physicians had in vain attempted to cure. For it has often happened that
people have served a man whom they intended to injure, and have injured
one whom they designed to serve; so that the effect of the gift is by no
means always a proof of the intention of the giver; neither does the
benefit which may accrue from it prove that it came from the hands of a
benefactor. For, in short, what debauchery, what avarice, what crime
among men is there which does not owe its birth to thought and
reflection, that is, to reason? For all opinion is reason: right reason,
if men’s thoughts are conformable to truth; wrong reason, if they are
not. The Gods only give us the mere faculty of reason, if we have any;
the use or abuse of it depends entirely upon ourselves; so that the
comparison is not just between the present of reason given us by the
Gods, and a patrimony left to a son by his father; for, after all, if
the injury of mankind had been the end proposed by the Gods, what could
they have given them more pernicious than reason? for what seed could
there be of injustice, intemperance, and cowardice, if reason were not
laid as the foundation of these vices?</p>
<p>XXIX. I mentioned just now Medea and Atreus, persons celebrated in
heroic poems, who had used this reason only for the contrivance and
practice of the most flagitious crimes; but even the trifling characters
which appear in comedies supply us with the like instances of this
reasoning faculty; for example, does not he, in the Eunuch, reason with
some subtlety?—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>What, then, must I resolve upon?</p>
<p>She turn’d me out-of-doors; she sends for me back again;</p>
<p>Shall I go? no, not if she were to beg it of me.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">Another, in the Twins, making no scruple of opposing a received maxim,
after the manner of the Academics, asserts that when a man is in love
and in want, it is pleasant</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>To have a father covetous, crabbed, and passionate,</p>
<p>Who has no love or affection for his children.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont"><a id="page-345"/><span class="pgnum">345</span>This unaccountable opinion he strengthens thus:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>You may defraud him of his profits, or forge letters in his name,</p>
<p>Or fright him by your servant into compliance;</p>
<p>And what you take from such an old hunks,</p>
<p>How much more pleasantly do you spend it!</p>
</div>
<p>On the contrary, he says that an easy, generous father is an
inconvenience to a son in love; for, says he,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>I can’t tell how to abuse so good, so prudent a parent,</p>
<p>Who always foreruns my desires, and meets me purse in hand,</p>
<p>To support me in my pleasures: this easy goodness and generosity</p>
<p>Quite defeat all my frauds, tricks, and stratagems.<a id="FNA-273"/><a href="#FN-273" class="pginternal"><sup>273</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p>What are these frauds, tricks, and stratagems but the effects of reason?
O excellent gift of the Gods! Without this Phormio could not have said,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Find me out the old man: I have something hatching for him in my
head.</p>
</div>
<p>XXX. But let us pass from the stage to the bar. The prætor<a id="FNA-274"/><a href="#FN-274" class="pginternal"><sup>274</sup></a> takes
his seat. To judge whom? The man who set fire to our archives. How
secretly was that villany conducted! Q. Sosius, an illustrious Roman
knight, of the Picene field,<a id="FNA-275"/><a href="#FN-275" class="pginternal"><sup>275</sup></a> confessed the fact. Who else is to be
tried? He who forged the public registers—Alenus, an artful fellow, who
counterfeited the handwriting of the six officers.<a id="FNA-276"/><a href="#FN-276" class="pginternal"><sup>276</sup></a> Let us call to
mind other trials: that on the subject of the gold of Tolosa, or the
conspiracy of Jugurtha. Let us trace back the informations laid against
Tubulus for bribery in his judicial office; and, since that, the
proceedings of the tribune Peduceus concerning the <a id="page-346"/><span class="pgnum">346</span>incest of the
vestals. Let us reflect upon the trials which daily happen for
assassinations, poisonings, embezzlement of public money, frauds in
wills, against which we have a new law; then that action against the
advisers or assisters of any theft; the many laws concerning frauds in
guardianship, breaches of trust in partnerships and commissions in
trade, and other violations of faith in buying, selling, borrowing, or
lending; the public decree on a private affair by the Lætorian Law;<a id="FNA-277"/><a href="#FN-277" class="pginternal"><sup>277</sup></a>
and, lastly, that scourge of all dishonesty, the law against fraud,
proposed by our friend Aquillius; that sort of fraud, he says, by which
one thing is pretended and another done. Can we, then, think that this
plentiful fountain of evil sprung from the immortal Gods? If they have
given reason to man, they have likewise given him subtlety, for subtlety
is only a deceitful manner of applying reason to do mischief. To them
likewise we must owe deceit, and every other crime, which, without the
help of reason, would neither have been thought of nor committed. As the
old woman wished</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>That to the fir which on Mount Pelion grew</p>
<p>The axe had ne’er been laid,<a id="FNA-278"/><a href="#FN-278" class="pginternal"><sup>278</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p class="cont">so we should wish that the Gods had never bestowed this ability on man,
the abuse of which is so general that the small number of those who make
a good use of it are often oppressed by those who make a bad use of it;
so that it seems to be given rather to help vice than to promote virtue
among us.</p>
<p>XXXI. This, you insist on it, is the fault of man, and not of the Gods.
But should we not laugh at a physician or pilot, though they are weak
mortals, if they were to lay the blame of their ill success on the
violence of the disease or the fury of the tempest? Had there not been
danger, <a id="page-347"/><span class="pgnum">347</span>we should say, who would have applied to you? This reasoning
has still greater force against the Deity. The fault, you say, is in
man, if he commits crimes. But why was not man endued with a reason
incapable of producing any crimes? How could the Gods err? When we leave
our effects to our children, it is in hopes that they may be well
bestowed; in which we may be deceived, but how can the Deity be
deceived? As Phœbus when he trusted his chariot to his son Phaëthon, or
as Neptune when he indulged his son Theseus in granting him three
wishes, the consequence of which was the destruction of Hippolitus?
These are poetical fictions; but truth, and not fables, ought to proceed
from philosophers. Yet if those poetical Deities had foreseen that
their indulgence would have proved fatal to their sons, they must have
been thought blamable for it.</p>
<p>Aristo of Chios used often to say that the philosophers do hurt to such
of their disciples as take their good doctrine in a wrong sense; thus
the lectures of Aristippus might produce debauchees, and those of Zeno
pedants. If this be true, it were better that philosophers should be
silent than that their disciples should be corrupted by a
misapprehension of their master’s meaning; so if reason, which was
bestowed on mankind by the Gods with a good design, tends only to make
men more subtle and fraudulent, it had been better for them never to
have received it. There could be no excuse for a physician who
prescribes wine to a patient, knowing that he will drink it and
immediately expire. Your Providence is no less blamable in giving reason
to man, who, it foresaw, would make a bad use of it. Will you say that
it did not foresee it? Nothing could please me more than such an
acknowledgment. But you dare not. I know what a sublime idea you
entertain of her.</p>
<p>XXXII. But to conclude. If folly, by the unanimous consent of
philosophers, is allowed to be the greatest of all evils, and if no one
ever attained to true wisdom, we, whom they say the immortal Gods take
care of, are consequently in a state of the utmost misery. For that
nobody is well, or that nobody can be well, is in effect the same thing;
and, in my opinion, that no man is truly wise, or that no <a id="page-348"/><span class="pgnum">348</span>man can be
truly wise, is likewise the same thing. But I will insist no further on
so self-evident a point. Telamon in one verse decides the question. If,
says he, there is a Divine Providence,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Good men would be happy, bad men miserable.</p>
</div>
<p class="cont">But it is not so. If the Gods had regarded mankind, they should have
made them all virtuous; but if they did not regard the welfare of all
mankind, at least they ought to have provided for the happiness of the
virtuous. Why, therefore, was the Carthaginian in Spain suffered to
destroy those best and bravest men, the two Scipios? Why did
Maximus<a id="FNA-279"/><a href="#FN-279" class="pginternal"><sup>279</sup></a> lose his son, the consul? Why did Hannibal kill Marcellus?
Why did Cannæ deprive us of Paulus? Why was the body of Regulus
delivered up to the cruelty of the Carthaginians? Why was not Africanus
protected from violence in his own house? To these, and many more
ancient instances, let us add some of later date. Why is Rutilius, my
uncle, a man of the greatest virtue and learning, now in banishment? Why
was my own friend and companion Drusus assassinated in his own house?
Why was Scævola, the high-priest, that pattern of moderation and
prudence, massacred before the statue of Vesta? Why, before that, were
so many illustrious citizens put to death by Cinna? Why had Marius, the
most perfidious of men, the power to cause the death of Catulus, a man
of the greatest dignity? But there would be no end of enumerating
examples of good men made miserable and wicked men prosperous. Why did
that Marius live to an old age, and die so happily at his own house in
his seventh consulship? Why was that inhuman wretch Cinna permitted to
enjoy so long a reign?</p>
<p>XXXIII. He, indeed, met with deserved punishment at last. But would it
not have been better that these inhumanities had been prevented than
that the author of them should be punished afterward? Varius, a most
impious wretch, was tortured and put to death. If this was his
punishment for the murdering Drusus by the sword, and Metellus by
poison, would it not have been better to have preserved their lives than
to have their deaths avenged on <a id="page-349"/><span class="pgnum">349</span>Varius? Dionysius was thirty-eight
years a tyrant over the most opulent and flourishing city; and, before
him, how many years did Pisistratus tyrannize in the very flower of
Greece! Phalaris and Apollodorus met with the fate they deserved, but
not till after they had tortured and put to death multitudes. Many
robbers have been executed; but the number of those who have suffered
for their crimes is short of those whom they have robbed and murdered.
Anaxarchus,<a id="FNA-280"/><a href="#FN-280" class="pginternal"><sup>280</sup></a> a scholar of Democritus, was cut to pieces by command
of the tyrant of Cyprus; and Zeno of Elea<a id="FNA-281"/><a href="#FN-281" class="pginternal"><sup>281</sup></a> ended his life in
tortures. What shall I say of Socrates,<a id="FNA-282"/><a href="#FN-282" class="pginternal"><sup>282</sup></a> whose death, as often as I
read of it in Plato, draws fresh tears from my eyes? If, therefore, the
Gods really see everything that happens to men, you must acknowledge
they make no distinction between the good and the bad.</p>
<p>XXXIV. Diogenes the Cynic used to say of Harpalus, one of the most
fortunate villains of his time, that the constant prosperity of such a
man was a kind of witness against the Gods. Dionysius, of whom we have
before spoken, after he had pillaged the temple of Proserpine at Locris,
set sail for Syracuse, and, having a fair wind during his voyage, said,
with a smile, “See, my friends, what favorable winds the immortal Gods
bestow upon church-robbers.” Encouraged by this prosperous event, he
proceeded in his impiety. When he landed at Peloponnesus, he went into
the temple of Jupiter Olympius, and disrobed his statue of a golden
mantle of great weight, an ornament which the tyrant Gelo<a id="FNA-283"/><a href="#FN-283" class="pginternal"><sup>283</sup></a> had given
out of the spoils of the Carthaginians, and at the same time, in a
jesting manner, he said “that a golden mantle was too heavy in summer
and too cold in winter;” and then, throwing a woollen cloak over the
statue, added, “This will serve for all seasons.” At another time, he
ordered the golden beard of Æsculapius of Epidaurus to be taken away,
saying that “it <a id="page-350"/><span class="pgnum">350</span>was absurd for the son to have a beard, when his father
had none.” He likewise robbed the temples of the silver tables, which,
according to the ancient custom of Greece, bore this inscription, “To
the good Gods,” saying “he was willing to make use of their goodness;”
and, without the least scruple, took away the little golden emblems of
victory, the cups and coronets, which were in the stretched-out hands of
the statues, saying “he did not take, but receive them; for it would be
folly not to accept good things from the Gods, to whom we are constantly
praying for favors, when they stretch out their hands towards us.” And,
last of all, all the things which he had thus pillaged from the temples
were, by his order, brought to the market-place and sold by the common
crier; and, after he had received the money for them, he commanded every
purchaser to restore what he had bought, within a limited time, to the
temples from whence they came. Thus to his impiety towards the Gods he
added injustice to man.</p>
<p>XXXV. Yet neither did Olympian Jove strike him with his thunder, nor did
Æsculapius cause him to die by tedious diseases and a lingering death.
He died in his bed, had funeral honors<a id="FNA-284"/><a href="#FN-284" class="pginternal"><sup>284</sup></a> paid to him, and left his
power, which he had wickedly obtained, as a just and lawful inheritance
to his son.</p>
<p>It is not without concern that I maintain a doctrine which seems to
authorize evil, and which might probably give a sanction to it, if
conscience, without any divine assistance, did not point out, in the
clearest manner, the difference between virtue and vice. Without
conscience man is contemptible. For as no family or state can be
supposed to be formed with any reason or discipline if there are no
rewards for good actions nor punishment for crimes, so we cannot believe
that a Divine Providence regulates the world if there is no distinction
between the honest and the wicked.</p>
<p><a id="page-351"/><span class="pgnum">351</span>But the Gods, you say, neglect trifling things: the little fields or
vineyards of particular men are not worthy their attention; and if
blasts or hail destroy their product, Jupiter does not regard it, nor do
kings extend their care to the lower offices of government. This
argument might have some weight if, in bringing Rutilius as an instance,
I had only complained of the loss of his farm at Formiæ; but I spoke of
a personal misfortune, his banishment.<a id="FNA-285"/><a href="#FN-285" class="pginternal"><sup>285</sup></a></p>
<p>XXXVI. All men agree that external benefits, such as vineyards, corn,
olives, plenty of fruit and grain, and, in short, every convenience and
property of life, are derived from the Gods; and, indeed, with reason,
since by our virtue we claim applause, and in virtue we justly glory,
which we could have no right to do if it was the gift of the Gods, and
not a personal merit. When we are honored with new dignities, or blessed
with increase of riches; when we are favored by fortune beyond our
expectation, or luckily delivered from any approaching evil, we return
thanks for it to the Gods, and assume no praise to ourselves. But who
ever thanked the Gods that he was a good man? We thank them, indeed, for
riches, health, and honor. For these we invoke the all-good and
all-powerful Jupiter; but not for wisdom, temperance, and justice. No
one ever offered a tenth of his estate to Hercules to be made wise. It
is reported, indeed, of Pythagoras that he sacrificed an ox to the Muses
upon having made some new discovery in geometry;<a id="FNA-286"/><a href="#FN-286" class="pginternal"><sup>286</sup></a> but, for my part,
I cannot believe it, because he refused to sacrifice even to Apollo at
Delos, lest he should defile the altar with blood. But to return. It is
universally agreed that good fortune we must ask of the Gods, but wisdom
must arise from ourselves; and though temples have been consecrated to
the Mind, to Virtue, and to Faith, yet that does not contradict their
being <a id="page-352"/><span class="pgnum">352</span>inherent in us. In regard to hope, safety, assistance, and
victory, we must rely upon the Gods for them; from whence it follows, as
Diogenes said, that the prosperity of the wicked destroys the idea of a
Divine Providence.</p>
<p>XXXVII. But good men have sometimes success. They have so; but we
cannot, with any show of reason, attribute that success to the Gods.
Diagoras, who is called the atheist, being at Samothrace, one of his
friends showed him several pictures<a id="FNA-287"/><a href="#FN-287" class="pginternal"><sup>287</sup></a> of people who had endured very
dangerous storms; “See,” says he, “you who deny a providence, how many
have been saved by their prayers to the Gods.” “Ay,” says Diagoras, “I
see those who were saved, but where are those painted who were
shipwrecked?” At another time, he himself was in a storm, when the
sailors, being greatly alarmed, told him they justly deserved that
misfortune for admitting him into their ship; when he, pointing to
others under the like distress, asked them “if they believed Diagoras
was also aboard those ships?” In short, with regard to good or bad
fortune, it matters not what you are, or how you have lived. The Gods,
like kings, regard not everything. What similitude is there between
them? If kings neglect anything, want of knowledge may be pleaded in
their defence; but ignorance cannot be brought as an excuse for the
Gods.</p>
<p>XXXVIII. Your manner of justifying them is somewhat extraordinary, when
you say that if a wicked man dies without suffering for his crimes, the
Gods inflict a punishment on his children, his children’s children, and
all his posterity. O wonderful equity of the Gods! What city would
endure the maker of a law which should condemn a son or a grandson for a
crime committed by the father or the grandfather?</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Shall Tantalus’ unhappy offspring know</p>
<p>No end, no close, of this long scene of woe?</p>
<p>When will the dire reward of guilt be o’er,</p>
<p>And Myrtilus demand revenge no more?<a id="FNA-288"/><a href="#FN-288" class="pginternal"><sup>288</sup></a></p>
</div>
<p>Whether the poets have corrupted the Stoics, or the Stoics given
authority to the poets, I cannot easily determine. Both alike are to be
condemned. If those persons <a id="page-353"/><span class="pgnum">353</span>whose names have been branded in the
satires of Hipponax or Archilochus<a id="FNA-289"/><a href="#FN-289" class="pginternal"><sup>289</sup></a> were driven to despair, it did
not proceed from the Gods, but had its origin in their own minds. When
we see Ægistus and Paris lost in the heat of an impure passion, why are
we to attribute it to a Deity, when the crime, as it were, speaks for
itself? I believe that those who recover from illness are more indebted
to the care of Hippocrates than to the power of Æsculapius; that Sparta
received her laws from Lycurgus<a id="FNA-290"/><a href="#FN-290" class="pginternal"><sup>290</sup></a> rather than from Apollo; that those
eyes of the maritime coast, Corinth and Carthage, were plucked out, the
one by Critolaus, the other by Hasdrubal, without the assistance of any
divine anger, since you yourselves confess that a Deity cannot possibly
be angry on any provocation.</p>
<p>XXXIX. But could not the Deity have assisted and preserved those eminent
cities? Undoubtedly he could; for, according to your doctrine, his power
is infinite, and without the least labor; and as nothing but the will is
necessary to the motion of our bodies, so the divine will of the Gods,
with the like ease, can create, move, and change all things. This you
hold, not from a mere phantom of superstition, but on natural and
settled principles of reason; for matter, you say, of which all things
are composed and consist, is susceptible of all forms and changes, and
there is nothing which cannot be, or cease to be, in an instant; and
that Divine Providence has the command and disposal of this universal
matter, and consequently can, in any part of the universe, do whatever
she pleases: from whence I conclude that this Providence either knows
not the extent of her power, or neglects human affairs, or cannot judge
what is best for us. Providence, you say, does not extend her care to
particular men; there <a id="page-354"/><span class="pgnum">354</span>is no wonder in that, since she does not extend
it to cities, or even to nations, or people. If, therefore, she neglects
whole nations, is it not very probable that she neglects all mankind?
But how can you assert that the Gods do not enter into all the little
circumstances of life, and yet hold that they distribute dreams among
men? Since you believe in dreams, it is your part to solve this
difficulty. Besides, you say we ought to call upon the Gods. Those who
call upon the Gods are individuals. Divine Providence, therefore,
regards individuals, which consequently proves that they are more at
leisure than you imagine. Let us suppose the Divine Providence to be
greatly busied; that it causes the revolutions of the heavens, supports
the earth, and rules the seas; why does it suffer so many Gods to be
unemployed? Why is not the superintendence of human affairs given to
some of those idle Deities which you say are innumerable?</p>
<p>This is the purport of what I had to say concerning “the Nature of the
Gods;” not with a design to destroy their existence, but merely to show
what an obscure point it is, and with what difficulties an explanation
of it is attended.</p>
<p>XL. Balbus, observing that Cotta had finished his discourse—You have
been very severe, says he, against a Divine Providence, a doctrine
established by the Stoics with piety and wisdom; but, as it grows too
late, I shall defer my answer to another day. Our argument is of the
greatest importance; it concerns our altars,<a id="FNA-291"/><a href="#FN-291" class="pginternal"><sup>291</sup></a> our hearths, our
temples, nay, even the walls of our city, which you priests hold sacred;
you, who by religion defend Rome better than she is defended by her
ramparts. This is a cause which, while I have life, I think I cannot
abandon without impiety.</p>
<p>There is nothing, replied Cotta, which I desire more than to be
confuted. I have not pretended to decide this point, but to give you my
private sentiments upon it; and am very sensible of your great
superiority in argument. <a id="page-355"/><span class="pgnum">355</span>No doubt of it, says Velleius; we have much to
fear from one who believes that our dreams are sent from Jupiter, which,
though they are of little weight, are yet of more importance than the
discourse of the Stoics concerning the nature of the Gods. The
conversation ended here, and we parted. Velleius judged that the
arguments of Cotta were truest; but those of Balbus seemed to me to have
the greater probability.<a id="FNA-292"/><a href="#FN-292" class="pginternal"><sup>292</sup></a></p>
<h2>FOOTNOTES:</h2>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-72"/><a href="#FNA-72" class="pginternal"><sup>72</sup></a> Some read <i>scientiam</i> and some <i>inscientiam;</i> the latter
of which is preferred by some of the best editors and commentators.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-73"/><a href="#FNA-73" class="pginternal"><sup>73</sup></a> For a short account of these ancient Greek philosophers,
see the sketch prefixed to the Academics (<i>Classical Library</i>).</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-74"/><a href="#FNA-74" class="pginternal"><sup>74</sup></a> Cicero wrote his philosophical works in the last three
years of his life. When he wrote this piece, he was in the sixty-third
year of his age, in the year of Rome 709.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-75"/><a href="#FNA-75" class="pginternal"><sup>75</sup></a> The Academic.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-76"/><a href="#FNA-76" class="pginternal"><sup>76</sup></a> Diodorus and Posidonius were Stoics; Philo and Antiochus
were Academics; but the latter afterward inclined to the doctrine of the
Stoics.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-77"/><a href="#FNA-77" class="pginternal"><sup>77</sup></a> Julius Cæsar.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-78"/><a href="#FNA-78" class="pginternal"><sup>78</sup></a> Cicero was one of the College of Augurs.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-79"/><a href="#FNA-79" class="pginternal"><sup>79</sup></a> The Latinæ Feriæ was originally a festival of the Latins,
altered by Tarquinius Superbus into a Roman one. It was held in the
Alban Mount, in honor of Jupiter Latiaris. This holiday lasted six days:
it was not held at any fixed time; but the consul was never allowed to
take the field till he had held them.—<i>Vide</i> Smith, Dict. Gr. and Rom.
Ant., p. 414.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-80"/><a href="#FNA-80" class="pginternal"><sup>80</sup></a> <i>Exhedra</i>, the word used by Cicero, means a study, or
place where disputes were held.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-81"/><a href="#FNA-81" class="pginternal"><sup>81</sup></a> M. Piso was a Peripatetic. The four great sects were the
Stoics, the Peripatetics, the Academics, and the Epicureans.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-82"/><a href="#FNA-82" class="pginternal"><sup>82</sup></a> It was a prevailing tenet of the Academics that there is
no certain knowledge.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-83"/><a href="#FNA-83" class="pginternal"><sup>83</sup></a> The five forms of Plato are these: <span class="greek">οὐσία, ταὐτὸν, ἕτερον,
στάσις, κίνησις.</span></p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-84"/><a href="#FNA-84" class="pginternal"><sup>84</sup></a> The four natures here to be understood are the four
elements—fire, water, air, and earth; which are mentioned as the four
principles of Empedocles by Diogenes Laertius.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-85"/><a href="#FNA-85" class="pginternal"><sup>85</sup></a> These five moving stars are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Mercury, and Venus. Their revolutions are considered in the next book.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-86"/><a href="#FNA-86" class="pginternal"><sup>86</sup></a> Or, Generation of the Gods.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-87"/><a href="#FNA-87" class="pginternal"><sup>87</sup></a> The <span class="greek">πρόληψις</span> of Epicurus, before mentioned, is what he
here means.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-88"/><a href="#FNA-88" class="pginternal"><sup>88</sup></a> <span class="greek">Στερέμνια</span> is the word which Epicurus used to distinguish
between those objects which are perceptible to sense, and those which
are imperceptible; as the essence of the Divine Being, and the various
operations of the divine power.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-89"/><a href="#FNA-89" class="pginternal"><sup>89</sup></a> Zeno here mentioned is not the same that Cotta spoke of
before. This was the founder of the Stoics. The other was an Epicurean
philosopher whom he had heard at Athens.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-90"/><a href="#FNA-90" class="pginternal"><sup>90</sup></a> That is, there would be the same uncertainty in heaven as
is among the Academics.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-91"/><a href="#FNA-91" class="pginternal"><sup>91</sup></a> Those nations which were neither Greek nor Roman.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-92"/><a href="#FNA-92" class="pginternal"><sup>92</sup></a> <i>Sigilla numerantes</i> is the common reading; but P.
Manucius proposes <i>venerantes</i>, which I choose as the better of the two,
and in which sense I have translated it.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-93"/><a href="#FNA-93" class="pginternal"><sup>93</sup></a> Fundamental doctrines.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-94"/><a href="#FNA-94" class="pginternal"><sup>94</sup></a> That is, the zodiac.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-95"/><a href="#FNA-95" class="pginternal"><sup>95</sup></a> The moon, as well as the sun, is indeed in the zodiac, but
she does not measure the same course in a month. She moves in another
line of the zodiac nearer the earth.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-96"/><a href="#FNA-96" class="pginternal"><sup>96</sup></a> According to the doctrines of Epicurus, none of these
bodies themselves are clearly seen, but <i>simulacra ex corporibus
effluentia</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-97"/><a href="#FNA-97" class="pginternal"><sup>97</sup></a> Epicurus taught his disciples in a garden.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-98"/><a href="#FNA-98" class="pginternal"><sup>98</sup></a> By the word <i>Deus</i>, as often used by our author, we are to
understand all the Gods in that theology then treated of, and not a
single personal Deity.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-99"/><a href="#FNA-99" class="pginternal"><sup>99</sup></a> The best commentators on this passage agree that Cicero
does not mean that Aristotle affirmed that there was no such person as
Orpheus, but that there was no such poet, and that the verse called
Orphic was said to be the invention of another. The passage of Aristotle
to which Cicero here alludes has, as Dr. Davis observes, been long
lost.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-100"/><a href="#FNA-100" class="pginternal"><sup>100</sup></a> A just proportion between the different sorts of beings.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-101"/><a href="#FNA-101" class="pginternal"><sup>101</sup></a> Some give <i>quos non pudeat earum Epicuri vocum;</i> but the
best copies have not <i>non;</i> nor would it be consistent with Cotta to say
<i>quos non pudeat</i>, for he throughout represents Velleius as a perfect
Epicurean in every article.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-102"/><a href="#FNA-102" class="pginternal"><sup>102</sup></a> His country was Abdera, the natives of which were
remarkable for their stupidity.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-103"/><a href="#FNA-103" class="pginternal"><sup>103</sup></a> This passage will not admit of a translation answerable
to the sense of the original. Cicero says the word <i>amicitia</i>
(friendship) is derived from <i>amor</i> (love or affection).</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-104"/><a href="#FNA-104" class="pginternal"><sup>104</sup></a> This manner of speaking of Jupiter frequently occurs in
Homer,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>——<span class="greek">πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε,</span></p>
</div>
<p>and has been used by Virgil and other poets since Ennius.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-105"/><a href="#FNA-105" class="pginternal"><sup>105</sup></a> Perses, or Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, was taken
by Cnæus Octavius, the prætor, and brought as prisoner to Paullus
Æmilius, 167 <span class="sc">b.c.</span></p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-106"/><a href="#FNA-106" class="pginternal"><sup>106</sup></a> An exemption from serving in the wars, and from paying
public taxes.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-107"/><a href="#FNA-107" class="pginternal"><sup>107</sup></a> Mopsus. There were two soothsayers of this name: the
first was one of the Lapithæ, son of Ampycus and Chloris, called also
the son of Apollo and Hienantis; the other a son of Apollo and Manto,
who is said to have founded Mallus, in Asia Minor, where his oracle
existed as late as the time of Strabo.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-108"/><a href="#FNA-108" class="pginternal"><sup>108</sup></a> Tiresias was the great Theban prophet at the time of the
war of the Seven against Thebes.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-109"/><a href="#FNA-109" class="pginternal"><sup>109</sup></a> Amphiaraus was King of Argos (he had been one of the
Argonauts also). He was killed after the war of the Seven against
Thebes, which he was compelled to join in by the treachery of his wife
Eriphyle, by the earth opening and swallowing him up as he was fleeing
from Periclymenus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-110"/><a href="#FNA-110" class="pginternal"><sup>110</sup></a> Calchas was the prophet of the Grecian army at the siege
of Troy.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-111"/><a href="#FNA-111" class="pginternal"><sup>111</sup></a> Helenus was a son of Priam and Hecuba. He is represented
as a prophet in the Philoctetes of Sophocles. And in the Æneid he is
also represented as king of part of Epirus, and as predicting to Æneas
the dangers and fortunes which awaited him.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-112"/><a href="#FNA-112" class="pginternal"><sup>112</sup></a> This short passage would be very obscure to the reader
without an explanation from another of Cicero’s treatises. The
expression here, <i>ad investigandum suem regiones vineæ terminavit</i>,
which is a metaphor too bold, if it was not a sort of augural language,
seems to me to have been the effect of carelessness in our great author;
for Navius did not divide the regions, as he calls them, of the vine to
find his sow, but to find a grape.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-113"/><a href="#FNA-113" class="pginternal"><sup>113</sup></a> The Peremnia were a sort of auspices performed just
before the passing a river.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-114"/><a href="#FNA-114" class="pginternal"><sup>114</sup></a> The Acumina were a military auspices, and were partly
performed on the point of a spear, from which they were called Acumina.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-115"/><a href="#FNA-115" class="pginternal"><sup>115</sup></a> Those were called <i>testamenta in procinctu</i>, which were
made by soldiers just before an engagement, in the presence of men
called as witnesses.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-116"/><a href="#FNA-116" class="pginternal"><sup>116</sup></a> This especially refers to the Decii, one of whom devoted
himself for his country in the war with the Latins, 340 <span class="sc">b.c.</span>, and his
son imitated the action in the war with the Samnites, 295 <span class="sc">b.c.</span> Cicero
(Tusc. i. 37) says that his son did the same thing in the war with
Pyrrhus at the battle of Asculum, though in other places (De Off. iii.
4) he speaks of only two Decii as having signalized themselves in this
manner.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-117"/><a href="#FNA-117" class="pginternal"><sup>117</sup></a> The Rogator, who collected the votes, and pronounced who
was the person chosen. There were two sorts of Rogators; one was the
officer here mentioned, and the other was the Rogator, or speaker of the
whole assembly.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-118"/><a href="#FNA-118" class="pginternal"><sup>118</sup></a> Which was Sardinia, as appears from one of Cicero’s
epistles to his brother Quintus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-119"/><a href="#FNA-119" class="pginternal"><sup>119</sup></a> Their sacred books of ceremonies.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-120"/><a href="#FNA-120" class="pginternal"><sup>120</sup></a> The war between Octavius and Cinna, the consuls.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-121"/><a href="#FNA-121" class="pginternal"><sup>121</sup></a> This, in the original, is a fragment of an old Latin
verse,</p>
<div class="poem">
<p><i>——Terram fumare calentem.</i></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-122"/><a href="#FNA-122" class="pginternal"><sup>122</sup></a> The Latin word is <i>principatus</i>, which exactly
corresponds with the Greek word here used by Cicero; by which is to be
understood the superior, the most prevailing excellence in every kind
and species of things through the universe.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-123"/><a href="#FNA-123" class="pginternal"><sup>123</sup></a> The passage of Aristotle to which Cicero here refers is
lost.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-124"/><a href="#FNA-124" class="pginternal"><sup>124</sup></a> He means the Epicureans.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-125"/><a href="#FNA-125" class="pginternal"><sup>125</sup></a> Here the Stoic speaks too plain to be misunderstood. His
world, his <i>mundus</i>, is the universe, and that universe is his great
Deity, <i>in quo sit totius naturæ principatus</i>, in which the superior
excellence of universal nature consists.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-126"/><a href="#FNA-126" class="pginternal"><sup>126</sup></a> Athens, the seat of learning and politeness, of which
Balbus will not allow Epicurus to be worthy.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-127"/><a href="#FNA-127" class="pginternal"><sup>127</sup></a> This is Pythagoras’s doctrine, as appears in Diogenes
Laertius.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-128"/><a href="#FNA-128" class="pginternal"><sup>128</sup></a> He here alludes to mathematical and geometrical
instruments.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-129"/><a href="#FNA-129" class="pginternal"><sup>129</sup></a> Balbus here speaks of the fixed stars, and of the motions
of the orbs of the planets. He here alludes, says M. Bonhier, to the
different and diurnal motions of these stars; one sort from east to
west, the other from one tropic to the other: and this is the
construction which our learned and great geometrician and astronomer,
Dr. Halley, made of this passage.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-130"/><a href="#FNA-130" class="pginternal"><sup>130</sup></a> This mensuration of the year into three hundred and
sixty-five days and near six hours (by the odd hours and minutes of
which, in every fifth year, the <i>dies intercalaris</i>, or leap-year, is
made) could not but be known, Dr. Halley states, by Hipparchus, as
appears from the remains of that great astronomer of the ancients. We
are inclined to think that Julius Cæsar had divided the year, according
to what we call the Julian year, before Cicero wrote this book; for we
see, in the beginning of it, how pathetically he speaks of Cæsar’s
usurpation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-131"/><a href="#FNA-131" class="pginternal"><sup>131</sup></a> The words of Censorinus, on this occasion, are to the
same effect. The opinions of philosophers concerning this great year are
very different; but the institution of it is ascribed to Democritus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-132"/><a href="#FNA-132" class="pginternal"><sup>132</sup></a> The zodiac.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-133"/><a href="#FNA-133" class="pginternal"><sup>133</sup></a> Though Mars is said to hold his orbit in the zodiac with
the rest, and to finish his revolution through the same orbit (that is,
the zodiac) with the other two, yet Balbus means in a different line of
the zodiac.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-134"/><a href="#FNA-134" class="pginternal"><sup>134</sup></a> According to late observations, it never goes but a sign
and a half from the sun.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-135"/><a href="#FNA-135" class="pginternal"><sup>135</sup></a> These, Dr. Davis says, are “aërial fires;” concerning
which he refers to the second book of Pliny.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-136"/><a href="#FNA-136" class="pginternal"><sup>136</sup></a> In the Eunuch of Terence.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-137"/><a href="#FNA-137" class="pginternal"><sup>137</sup></a> Bacchus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-138"/><a href="#FNA-138" class="pginternal"><sup>138</sup></a> The son of Ceres.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-139"/><a href="#FNA-139" class="pginternal"><sup>139</sup></a> The books of Ceremonies.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-140"/><a href="#FNA-140" class="pginternal"><sup>140</sup></a> This Libera is taken for Proserpine, who, with her
brother Liber, was consecrated by the Romans; all which are parts of
nature in prosopopœias. Cicero, therefore, makes Balbus distinguish
between the person Liber, or Bacchus, and the Liber which is a part of
nature in prosopopœia.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-141"/><a href="#FNA-141" class="pginternal"><sup>141</sup></a> These allegorical fables are largely related by Hesiod in
his Theogony.</p>
<p>Horace says exactly the same thing:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Hâc arte Pollux et vagus Hercules</p>
<p>Enisus arces attigit igneas:</p>
<p class="L2">Quos inter Augustus recumbens</p>
<p class="L4">Purpureo bibit ore nectar.</p>
<p>Hâc te merentem, Bacche pater, tuæ</p>
<p>Vexere tigres indocili jugum</p>
<p class="L2">Collo ferentes: hâc Quirinus</p>
<p class="L4">Martis equis Acheronta fugit.—Hor. iii. 3. 9.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-142"/><a href="#FNA-142" class="pginternal"><sup>142</sup></a> Cicero means by <i>conversis casibus</i>, varying the cases
from the common rule of declension; that is, by departing from the true
grammatical rules of speech; for if we would keep to it, we should
decline the word <i>Jupiter</i>, <i>Jupiteris</i> in the second case, etc.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-143"/><a href="#FNA-143" class="pginternal"><sup>143</sup></a> <i>Pater divûmque hominumque.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-144"/><a href="#FNA-144" class="pginternal"><sup>144</sup></a> The common reading is, <i>planiusque alio loco idem;</i>
which, as Dr. Davis observes, is absurd; therefore, in his note, he
prefers <i>planius quam alia loco idem</i>, from two copies, in which sense I
have translated it.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-145"/><a href="#FNA-145" class="pginternal"><sup>145</sup></a> From the verb <i>gero</i>, to bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-146"/><a href="#FNA-146" class="pginternal"><sup>146</sup></a> That is, “mother earth.”</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-147"/><a href="#FNA-147" class="pginternal"><sup>147</sup></a> Janus is said to be the first who erected temples in
Italy, and instituted religious rites, and from whom the first month in
the Roman calendar is derived.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-148"/><a href="#FNA-148" class="pginternal"><sup>148</sup></a> <i>Stellæ vagantes.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-149"/><a href="#FNA-149" class="pginternal"><sup>149</sup></a> <i>Noctu quasi diem efficeret.</i> Ben Jonson says the same
thing:</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Thou that mak’st a day of night,</p>
<p>Goddess excellently bright.—<i>Ode to the Moon.</i></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-150"/><a href="#FNA-150" class="pginternal"><sup>150</sup></a> Olympias was the mother of Alexander.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-151"/><a href="#FNA-151" class="pginternal"><sup>151</sup></a> Venus is here said to be one of the names of Diana,
because <i>ad res omnes veniret;</i> but she is not supposed to be the same
as the mother of Cupid.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-152"/><a href="#FNA-152" class="pginternal"><sup>152</sup></a> Here is a mistake, as Fulvius Ursinus observes; for the
discourse seems to be continued in one day, as appears from the
beginning of this book. This may be an inadvertency of Cicero.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-153"/><a href="#FNA-153" class="pginternal"><sup>153</sup></a> The senate of Athens was so called from the words <span class="greek">Ἄρειος Πάγος</span>, the Village, some say the Hill, of Mars.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-154"/><a href="#FNA-154" class="pginternal"><sup>154</sup></a> Epicurus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-155"/><a href="#FNA-155" class="pginternal"><sup>155</sup></a> The Stoics.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-156"/><a href="#FNA-156" class="pginternal"><sup>156</sup></a> By <i>nulla cohærendi natura</i>—if it is the right, as it is
the common reading—Cicero must mean the same as by <i>nulla crescendi
natura</i>, or <i>coalescendi</i>, either of which Lambinus proposes; for, as the
same learned critic well observes, is there not a cohesion of parts in a
clod, or in a piece of stone? Our learned Walker proposes <i>sola
cohærendi natura</i>, which mends the sense very much; and I wish he had
the authority of any copy for it.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-157"/><a href="#FNA-157" class="pginternal"><sup>157</sup></a> Nasica Scipio, the censor, is said to have been the first
who made a water-clock in Rome.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-158"/><a href="#FNA-158" class="pginternal"><sup>158</sup></a> The Epicureans.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-159"/><a href="#FNA-159" class="pginternal"><sup>159</sup></a> An old Latin poet, commended by Quintilian for the
gravity of his sense and his loftiness of style.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-160"/><a href="#FNA-160" class="pginternal"><sup>160</sup></a> The shepherd is here supposed to take the stem or beak of
the ship for the mouth, from which the roaring voices of the sailors
came. <i>Rostrum</i> is here a lucky word to put in the mouth of one who
never saw a ship before, as it is used for the beak of a bird, the snout
of a beast or fish, and for the stem of a ship.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-161"/><a href="#FNA-161" class="pginternal"><sup>161</sup></a> The Epicureans.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-162"/><a href="#FNA-162" class="pginternal"><sup>162</sup></a> Greek, <span class="greek">ἀὴρ</span>; Latin, <i>aer</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-163"/><a href="#FNA-163" class="pginternal"><sup>163</sup></a> The treatise of Aristotle, from whence this is taken, is
lost.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-164"/><a href="#FNA-164" class="pginternal"><sup>164</sup></a> To the universe the Stoics certainly annexed the idea of
a limited space, otherwise they could not have talked of a middle; for
there can be no middle but of a limited space: infinite space can have
no middle, there being infinite extension from every part.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-165"/><a href="#FNA-165" class="pginternal"><sup>165</sup></a> These two contrary reversions are from the tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn. They are the extreme bounds of the sun’s course.
The reader must observe that the astronomical parts of this book are
introduced by the Stoic as proofs of design and reason in the universe;
and, notwithstanding the errors in his planetary system, his intent is
well answered, because all he means is that the regular motions of the
heavenly bodies, and their dependencies, are demonstrations of a divine
mind. The inference proposed to be drawn from his astronomical
observations is as just as if his system was in every part
unexceptionably right: the same may be said of his anatomical
observations.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-166"/><a href="#FNA-166" class="pginternal"><sup>166</sup></a> In the zodiac.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-167"/><a href="#FNA-167" class="pginternal"><sup>167</sup></a> Ibid.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-168"/><a href="#FNA-168" class="pginternal"><sup>168</sup></a> These verses of Cicero are a translation from a Greek
poem of Aratus, called the Phænomena.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-169"/><a href="#FNA-169" class="pginternal"><sup>169</sup></a> The fixed stars.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-170"/><a href="#FNA-170" class="pginternal"><sup>170</sup></a> The arctic and antarctic poles.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-171"/><a href="#FNA-171" class="pginternal"><sup>171</sup></a> The two Arctoi are northern constellations. Cynosura is
what we call the Lesser Bear; Helice, the Greater Bear; in Latin, <i>Ursa
Minor</i> and <i>Ursa Major</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-172"/><a href="#FNA-172" class="pginternal"><sup>172</sup></a> These stars in the Greater Bear are vulgarly called the
“Seven Stars,” or the “Northern Wain;” by the Latins, “Septentriones.”</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-173"/><a href="#FNA-173" class="pginternal"><sup>173</sup></a> The Lesser Bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-174"/><a href="#FNA-174" class="pginternal"><sup>174</sup></a> The Greater Bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-175"/><a href="#FNA-175" class="pginternal"><sup>175</sup></a> Exactly agreeable to this and the following description
of the Dragon is the same northern constellation described in the map by
Flamsteed in his Atlas Cœlestis; and all the figures here described by
Aratus nearly agree with the maps of the same constellations in the
Atlas Cœlestis, though they are not all placed precisely alike.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-176"/><a href="#FNA-176" class="pginternal"><sup>176</sup></a> The tail of the Greater Bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-177"/><a href="#FNA-177" class="pginternal"><sup>177</sup></a> That is, in Macedon, where Aratus lived.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-178"/><a href="#FNA-178" class="pginternal"><sup>178</sup></a> The true interpretation of this passage is as follows:
Here in Macedon, says Aratus, the head of the Dragon does not entirely
immerge itself in the ocean, but only touches the superficies of it. By
<i>ortus</i> and <i>obitus</i> I doubt not but Cicero meant, agreeable to Aratus,
those parts which arise to view, and those which are removed from
sight.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-179"/><a href="#FNA-179" class="pginternal"><sup>179</sup></a> These are two northern constellations. Engonasis, in some
catalogues called Hercules, because he is figured kneeling <span class="greek">ἐν γόνασιν</span>
(on his knees). <span class="greek">Ἐνγόνασιν καλέουσ’</span>, as Aratus says, they call
Engonasis.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-180"/><a href="#FNA-180" class="pginternal"><sup>180</sup></a> The crown is placed under the feet of Hercules in the
Atlas Cœlestis; but Ophiuchus (<span class="greek">Ὀφιοῦχος</span>), the Snake-holder, is placed in
the map by Flamsteed as described here by Aratus; and their heads almost
meet.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-181"/><a href="#FNA-181" class="pginternal"><sup>181</sup></a> The Scorpion. Ophiuchus, though a northern constellation,
is not far from that part of the zodiac where the Scorpion is, which is
one of the six southern signs.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-182"/><a href="#FNA-182" class="pginternal"><sup>182</sup></a> The Wain of seven stars.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-183"/><a href="#FNA-183" class="pginternal"><sup>183</sup></a> The Wain-driver. This northern constellation is, in our
present maps, figured with a club in his right hand behind the Greater
Bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-184"/><a href="#FNA-184" class="pginternal"><sup>184</sup></a> In some modern maps Arcturus, a star of the first
magnitude, is placed in the belt that is round the waist of Boötes.
Cicero says <i>subter præcordia</i>, which is about the waist; and Aratus
says <span class="greek">ὑπὸ ζώνῃ</span>, under the belt.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-185"/><a href="#FNA-185" class="pginternal"><sup>185</sup></a> <i>Sub caput Arcti</i>, under the head of the Greater Bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-186"/><a href="#FNA-186" class="pginternal"><sup>186</sup></a> The Crab is, by the ancients and moderns, placed in the
zodiac, as here, between the Twins and the Lion; and they are all three
northern signs.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-187"/><a href="#FNA-187" class="pginternal"><sup>187</sup></a> The Twins are placed in the zodiac with the side of one
to the northern hemisphere, and the side of the other to the southern
hemisphere. Auriga, the Charioteer, is placed in the northern hemisphere
near the zodiac, by the Twins; and at the head of the Charioteer is
Helice, the Greater Bear, placed; and the Goat is a bright star of the
first magnitude placed on the left shoulder of this northern
constellation, and called <i>Capra</i>, the Goat. <i>Hœdi</i>, the Kids, are two
more stars of the same constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-188"/><a href="#FNA-188" class="pginternal"><sup>188</sup></a> A constellation; one of the northern signs in the zodiac,
in which the Hyades are placed.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-189"/><a href="#FNA-189" class="pginternal"><sup>189</sup></a> One of the feet of Cepheus, a northern constellation, is
under the tail of the Lesser Bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-190"/><a href="#FNA-190" class="pginternal"><sup>190</sup></a> Grotius, and after him Dr. Davis, and other learned men,
read <i>Cassiepea</i>, after the Greek <span class="greek">Κασσίεπεια</span>, and reject the common
reading, <i>Cassiopea</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-191"/><a href="#FNA-191" class="pginternal"><sup>191</sup></a> These northern constellations here mentioned have been
always placed together as one family with Cepheus and Perseus, as they
are in our modern maps.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-192"/><a href="#FNA-192" class="pginternal"><sup>192</sup></a> This alludes to the fable of Perseus and Andromeda.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-193"/><a href="#FNA-193" class="pginternal"><sup>193</sup></a> Pegasus, who is one of Perseus and Andromeda’s family.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-194"/><a href="#FNA-194" class="pginternal"><sup>194</sup></a> That is, with wings.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-195"/><a href="#FNA-195" class="pginternal"><sup>195</sup></a> <i>Aries</i>, the Ram, is the first northern sign in the
zodiac; <i>Pisces</i>, the Fishes, the last southern sign; therefore they
must be near one another, as they are in a circle or belt. In
Flamsteed’s Atlas Cœlestis one of the Fishes is near the head of the
Ram, and the other near the Urn of Aquarius.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-196"/><a href="#FNA-196" class="pginternal"><sup>196</sup></a> These are called Virgiliæ by Cicero; by Aratus, the
Pleiades, <span class="greek">Πληϊάδες</span>; and they are placed at the neck of the Bull; and one
of Perseus’s feet touches the Bull in the Atlas Cœlestis.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-197"/><a href="#FNA-197" class="pginternal"><sup>197</sup></a> This northern constellation is called Fides by Cicero;
but it must be the same with Lyra; because Lyra is placed in our maps as
Fides is here.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-198"/><a href="#FNA-198" class="pginternal"><sup>198</sup></a> This is called Ales Avis by Cicero; and I doubt not but
the northern constellation Cygnus is here to be understood, for the
description and place of the Swan in the Atlas Cœlestis are the same
which Ales Avis has here.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-199"/><a href="#FNA-199" class="pginternal"><sup>199</sup></a> Pegasus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-200"/><a href="#FNA-200" class="pginternal"><sup>200</sup></a> The Water-bearer, one of the six southern signs in the
zodiac: he is described in our maps pouring water out of an urn, and
leaning with one hand on the tail of Capricorn, another southern sign.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-201"/><a href="#FNA-201" class="pginternal"><sup>201</sup></a> When the sun is in Capricorn, the days are at the
shortest; and when in Cancer, at the longest.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-202"/><a href="#FNA-202" class="pginternal"><sup>202</sup></a> One of the six southern signs.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-203"/><a href="#FNA-203" class="pginternal"><sup>203</sup></a> Sagittarius, another southern sign.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-204"/><a href="#FNA-204" class="pginternal"><sup>204</sup></a> A northern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-205"/><a href="#FNA-205" class="pginternal"><sup>205</sup></a> A northern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-206"/><a href="#FNA-206" class="pginternal"><sup>206</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-207"/><a href="#FNA-207" class="pginternal"><sup>207</sup></a> This is Canis Major, a southern constellation. Orion and
the Dog are named together by Hesiod, who flourished many hundred years
before Cicero or Aratus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-208"/><a href="#FNA-208" class="pginternal"><sup>208</sup></a> A southern constellation, placed as here in the Atlas
Cœlestis.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-209"/><a href="#FNA-209" class="pginternal"><sup>209</sup></a> A southern constellation, so called from the ship Argo,
in which Jason and the rest of the Argonauts sailed on their expedition
to Colchos.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-210"/><a href="#FNA-210" class="pginternal"><sup>210</sup></a> The Ram is the first of the northern signs in the zodiac;
and the last southern sign is the Fishes; which two signs, meeting in
the zodiac, cover the constellation called Argo.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-211"/><a href="#FNA-211" class="pginternal"><sup>211</sup></a> The river Eridanus, a southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-212"/><a href="#FNA-212" class="pginternal"><sup>212</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-213"/><a href="#FNA-213" class="pginternal"><sup>213</sup></a> This is called the Scorpion in the original of Aratus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-214"/><a href="#FNA-214" class="pginternal"><sup>214</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-215"/><a href="#FNA-215" class="pginternal"><sup>215</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-216"/><a href="#FNA-216" class="pginternal"><sup>216</sup></a> The Serpent is not mentioned in Cicero’s translation; but
it is in the original of Aratus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-217"/><a href="#FNA-217" class="pginternal"><sup>217</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-218"/><a href="#FNA-218" class="pginternal"><sup>218</sup></a> The Goblet, or Cup, a southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-219"/><a href="#FNA-219" class="pginternal"><sup>219</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-220"/><a href="#FNA-220" class="pginternal"><sup>220</sup></a> Antecanis, a southern constellation, is the Little Dog,
and called <i>Antecanis</i> in Latin, and <span class="greek">Προκύων</span> in Greek, because he rises
before the other Dog.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-221"/><a href="#FNA-221" class="pginternal"><sup>221</sup></a> Pansætius, a Stoic philosopher.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-222"/><a href="#FNA-222" class="pginternal"><sup>222</sup></a> Mercury and Venus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-223"/><a href="#FNA-223" class="pginternal"><sup>223</sup></a> The proboscis of the elephant is frequently called a
hand, because it is as useful to him as one. “They breathe, drink, and
smell, with what may not be improperly called a hand,” says Pliny, bk.
viii. c. 10.—<span class="sc">Davis</span>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-224"/><a href="#FNA-224" class="pginternal"><sup>224</sup></a> The passage of Aristotle’s works to which Cicero here
alludes is entirely lost; but Plutarch gives a similar account.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-225"/><a href="#FNA-225" class="pginternal"><sup>225</sup></a> Balbus does not tell us the remedy which the panther
makes use of; but Pliny is not quite so delicate: he says, <i>excrementis
hominis sibi medetur</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-226"/><a href="#FNA-226" class="pginternal"><sup>226</sup></a> Aristotle says they purge themselves with this herb after
they fawn. Pliny says both before and after.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-227"/><a href="#FNA-227" class="pginternal"><sup>227</sup></a> The cuttle-fish has a bag at its neck, the black blood of
which the Romans used for ink. It was called <i>atramentum</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-228"/><a href="#FNA-228" class="pginternal"><sup>228</sup></a> The Euphrates is said to carry into Mesopotamia a large
quantity of citrons, with which it covers the fields.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-229"/><a href="#FNA-229" class="pginternal"><sup>229</sup></a> Q. Curtius, and some other authors, say the Ganges is the
largest river in India; but Ammianus Marcellinus concurs with Cicero in
calling the river Indus the largest of all rivers.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-230"/><a href="#FNA-230" class="pginternal"><sup>230</sup></a> These Etesian winds return periodically once a year, and
blow at certain seasons, and for a certain time.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-231"/><a href="#FNA-231" class="pginternal"><sup>231</sup></a> Some read <i>mollitur</i>, and some <i>molitur;</i> the latter of
which P. Manucius justly prefers, from the verb <i>molo</i>, <i>molis;</i> from
whence, says he, <i>molares dentes</i>, the grinders.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-232"/><a href="#FNA-232" class="pginternal"><sup>232</sup></a> The weasand, or windpipe.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-233"/><a href="#FNA-233" class="pginternal"><sup>233</sup></a> The epiglottis, which is a cartilaginous flap in the
shape of a tongue, and therefore called so.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-234"/><a href="#FNA-234" class="pginternal"><sup>234</sup></a> Cicero is here giving the opinion of the ancients
concerning the passage of the chyle till it is converted to blood.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-235"/><a href="#FNA-235" class="pginternal"><sup>235</sup></a> What Cicero here calls the ventricles of the heart are
likewise called auricles, of which there is the right and left.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-236"/><a href="#FNA-236" class="pginternal"><sup>236</sup></a> The Stoics and Peripatetics said that the nerves, veins,
and arteries come directly from the heart. According to the anatomy of
the moderns, they come from the brain.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-237"/><a href="#FNA-237" class="pginternal"><sup>237</sup></a> The author means all musical instruments, whether string
or wind instruments, which are hollow and tortuous.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-238"/><a href="#FNA-238" class="pginternal"><sup>238</sup></a> The Latin version of Cicero is a translation from the
Greek of Aratus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-239"/><a href="#FNA-239" class="pginternal"><sup>239</sup></a> Chrysippus’s meaning is, that the swine is so inactive
and slothful a beast that life seems to be of no use to it but to keep
it from putrefaction, as salt keeps dead flesh.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-240"/><a href="#FNA-240" class="pginternal"><sup>240</sup></a> <i>Ales</i>, in the general signification, is any large bird;
and <i>oscinis</i> is any singing bird. But they here mean those birds which
are used in augury: <i>alites</i> are the birds whose flight was observed by
the augurs, and <i>oscines</i> the birds from whose voices they augured.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-241"/><a href="#FNA-241" class="pginternal"><sup>241</sup></a> As the Academics doubted everything, it was indifferent
to them which side of a question they took.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-242"/><a href="#FNA-242" class="pginternal"><sup>242</sup></a> The keepers and interpreters of the Sibylline oracles
were the Quindecimviri.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-243"/><a href="#FNA-243" class="pginternal"><sup>243</sup></a> The popular name of Jupiter in Rome, being looked upon as
defender of the Capitol (in which he was placed), and stayer of the
State.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-244"/><a href="#FNA-244" class="pginternal"><sup>244</sup></a> Some passages of the original are here wanting. Cotta
continues speaking against the doctrine of the Stoics.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-245"/><a href="#FNA-245" class="pginternal"><sup>245</sup></a> The word <i>sortes</i> is often used for the answers of the
oracles, or, rather, for the rolls in which the answers were written.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-246"/><a href="#FNA-246" class="pginternal"><sup>246</sup></a> Three of this eminent family sacrificed themselves for
their country; the father in the Latin war, the son in the Tuscan war,
and the grandson in the war with Pyrrhus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-247"/><a href="#FNA-247" class="pginternal"><sup>247</sup></a> The Straits of Gibraltar.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-248"/><a href="#FNA-248" class="pginternal"><sup>248</sup></a> The common reading is, <i>ex quo anima dicitur;</i> but Dr.
Davis and M. Bouhier prefer <i>animal</i>, though they keep <i>anima</i> in the
text, because our author says elsewhere, <i>animum ex anima dictum</i>, Tusc.
I. 1. Cicero is not here to be accused of contradictions, for we are to
consider that he speaks in the characters of other persons; but there
appears to be nothing in these two passages irreconcilable, and probably
<i>anima</i> is the right word here.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-249"/><a href="#FNA-249" class="pginternal"><sup>249</sup></a> He is said to have led a colony from Greece into Caria,
in Asia, and to have built a town, and called it after his own name, for
which his countrymen paid him divine honors after his death.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-250"/><a href="#FNA-250" class="pginternal"><sup>250</sup></a> Our great author is under a mistake here. Homer does not
say he met Hercules himself, but his <span class="greek">Εἴδωλον</span>, his “visionary likeness;”
and adds that he himself</p>
<div class="poem">
<p class="L6" style="margin-left: 15ex"><span class="greek">μετ’ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι</span></p>
<p><span class="greek">τέρπεται ἐν θαλίῃς, καὶ ἔχει καλλίσφυρου Ἥβην,</span></p>
<p><span class="greek">παῖδα Διὸς μεγάλοιο καὶ Ἥρης χρυσοπεδίλου.</span></p>
</div>
<p>which Pope translates—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>A shadowy form, for high in heaven’s abodes</p>
<p>Himself resides, a God among the Gods;</p>
<p>There, in the bright assemblies of the skies,</p>
<p>He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-251"/><a href="#FNA-251" class="pginternal"><sup>251</sup></a> They are said to have been the first workers in iron.
They were called Idæi, because they inhabited about Mount Ida in Crete,
and Dactyli, from <span class="greek">δάκτυλοι</span> (the fingers), their number being five.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-252"/><a href="#FNA-252" class="pginternal"><sup>252</sup></a> From whom, some say, the city of that name was called.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-253"/><a href="#FNA-253" class="pginternal"><sup>253</sup></a> Capedunculæ seem to have been bowls or cups, with handles
on each side, set apart for the use of the altar.—<span class="sc">Davis</span>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-254"/><a href="#FNA-254" class="pginternal"><sup>254</sup></a> See Cicero de Divinatione, and Ovid. Fast.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-255"/><a href="#FNA-255" class="pginternal"><sup>255</sup></a> In the consulship of Piso and Gabinius sacrifices to
Serapis and Isis were prohibited in Rome; but the Roman people afterward
placed them again in the number of their gods. See Tertullian’s Apol.
and his first book Ad Nationes, and Arnobius, lib. 2.—<span class="sc">Davis</span>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-256"/><a href="#FNA-256" class="pginternal"><sup>256</sup></a> In some copies Circe, Pasiphae, and Æa are mentioned
together; but Æa is rejected by the most judicious editors.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-257"/><a href="#FNA-257" class="pginternal"><sup>257</sup></a> They were three, and are said to have averted a plague by
offering themselves a sacrifice.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-258"/><a href="#FNA-258" class="pginternal"><sup>258</sup></a> So called from the Greek word <span class="greek">θαυμάζω</span>, to wonder.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-259"/><a href="#FNA-259" class="pginternal"><sup>259</sup></a> She was first called Geres, from <i>gero</i>, to bear.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-260"/><a href="#FNA-260" class="pginternal"><sup>260</sup></a> The word is <i>precatione</i>, which means the books or forms
of prayers used by the augurs.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-261"/><a href="#FNA-261" class="pginternal"><sup>261</sup></a> Cotta’s intent here, as well as in other places, is to
show how unphilosophical their civil theology was, and with what
confusions it was embarrassed; which design of the Academic the reader
should carefully keep in view, or he will lose the chain of argument.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-262"/><a href="#FNA-262" class="pginternal"><sup>262</sup></a> Anactes, <span class="greek">Ἄνακτες</span>, was a general name for all kings, as we
find in the oldest Greek writers, and particularly in Homer.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-263"/><a href="#FNA-263" class="pginternal"><sup>263</sup></a> The common reading is Aleo; but we follow Lambinus and
Davis, who had the authority of the best manuscript copies.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-264"/><a href="#FNA-264" class="pginternal"><sup>264</sup></a> Some prefer Phthas to Opas (see Dr. Davis’s edition); but
Opas is the generally received reading.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-265"/><a href="#FNA-265" class="pginternal"><sup>265</sup></a> The Lipari Isles.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-266"/><a href="#FNA-266" class="pginternal"><sup>266</sup></a> A town in Arcadia.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-267"/><a href="#FNA-267" class="pginternal"><sup>267</sup></a> In Arcadia.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-268"/><a href="#FNA-268" class="pginternal"><sup>268</sup></a> A northern people.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-269"/><a href="#FNA-269" class="pginternal"><sup>269</sup></a> So called from the Greek word <span class="greek">νόμος</span>, <i>lex</i>, a law.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-270"/><a href="#FNA-270" class="pginternal"><sup>270</sup></a> He is called <span class="greek">Ὦπις</span> in some old Greek fragments, and <span class="greek">Οὖπις</span> by Callimachus in his hymn on Diana.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-271"/><a href="#FNA-271" class="pginternal"><sup>271</sup></a> <span class="greek">Σαβάζίος</span>, Sabazius, is one of the names used for
Bacchus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-272"/><a href="#FNA-272" class="pginternal"><sup>272</sup></a> Here is a wide chasm in the original. What is lost
probably may have contained great part of Cotta’s arguments against the
providence of the Stoics.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-273"/><a href="#FNA-273" class="pginternal"><sup>273</sup></a> Here is one expression in the quotation from Cæcilius
that is not commonly met with, which is <i>præstigias præstrinxit;</i>
Lambinus gives <i>præstinxit</i>, for the sake, I suppose, of playing on
words, because it might then be translated, “He has deluded my
delusions, or stratagems;” but <i>præstrinxit</i> is certainly the right
reading.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-274"/><a href="#FNA-274" class="pginternal"><sup>274</sup></a> The ancient Romans had a judicial as well as a military
prætor; and he sat, with inferior judges attending him, like one of our
chief-justices. <i>Sessum it prætor</i>, which I doubt not is the right
reading, Lambinus restored from an old copy. The common reading was
<i>sessum ite precor</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-275"/><a href="#FNA-275" class="pginternal"><sup>275</sup></a> Picenum was a region of Italy.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-276"/><a href="#FNA-276" class="pginternal"><sup>276</sup></a> The <i>sex primi</i> were general receivers of all taxes and
tributes; and they were obliged to make good, out of their own fortunes,
whatever deficiencies were in the public treasury.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-277"/><a href="#FNA-277" class="pginternal"><sup>277</sup></a> The Lætorian Law was a security for those under age
against extortioners, etc. By this law all debts contracted under
twenty-five years of age were void.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-278"/><a href="#FNA-278" class="pginternal"><sup>278</sup></a> This is from Ennius—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p>Utinam ne in nemore Pelio securibus</p>
<p>Cæsa cecidisset abiegna ad terram trabes.</p>
</div>
<p>Translated from the beginning of the Medea of Euripides—</p>
<div class="poem">
<p><span class="greek">Μήδ’ ἐν νάπαισι Πηλίον πεσεῖν ποτε</span></p>
<p><span class="greek">τμηθεῖσα πεύκη.</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-279"/><a href="#FNA-279" class="pginternal"><sup>279</sup></a> Q. Fabius Maximus, surnamed Cunctator.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-280"/><a href="#FNA-280" class="pginternal"><sup>280</sup></a> Diogenes Laertius says he was pounded to death in a stone
mortar by command of Nicocreon, tyrant of Cyprus.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-281"/><a href="#FNA-281" class="pginternal"><sup>281</sup></a> Elea, a city of Lucania, in Italy. The manner in which
Zeno was put to death is, according to Diogenes Laertius, uncertain.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-282"/><a href="#FNA-282" class="pginternal"><sup>282</sup></a> This great and good man was accused of destroying the
divinity of the Gods of his country. He was condemned, and died by
drinking a glass of poison.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-283"/><a href="#FNA-283" class="pginternal"><sup>283</sup></a> Tyrant of Sicily.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-284"/><a href="#FNA-284" class="pginternal"><sup>284</sup></a> The common reading is, <i>in tympanidis rogum inlatus est</i>.
This passage has been the occasion of as many different opinions
concerning both the reading and the sense as any passage in the whole
treatise. <i>Tympanum</i> is used for a timbrel or drum, <i>tympanidia</i> a
diminutive of it. Lambinus says <i>tympana</i> “were sticks with which the
tyrant used to beat the condemned.” P. Victorius substitutes
<i>tyrannidis</i> for <i>tympanidis</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-285"/><a href="#FNA-285" class="pginternal"><sup>285</sup></a> The original is <i>de amissa salute;</i> which means the
sentence of banishment among the Romans, in which was contained the loss
of goods and estate, and the privileges of a Roman; and in this sense
L’Abbé d’Olivet translates it.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-286"/><a href="#FNA-286" class="pginternal"><sup>286</sup></a> The forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid
is unanimously ascribed to him by the ancients. Dr. Wotton, in his
Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning, says, “It is indeed a very
noble proposition, the foundation of trigonometry, of universal and
various use in those curious speculations about incommensurable
numbers.”</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-287"/><a href="#FNA-287" class="pginternal"><sup>287</sup></a> These votive tables, or pictures, were hung up in the
temples.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-288"/><a href="#FNA-288" class="pginternal"><sup>288</sup></a> This passage is a fragment from a tragedy of Attius.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-289"/><a href="#FNA-289" class="pginternal"><sup>289</sup></a> Hipponax was a poet at Ephesus, and so deformed that
Bupalus drew a picture of him to provoke laughter; for which Hipponax is
said to have written such keen iambics on the painter that he hanged
himself.</p>
<p>Lycambes had promised Archilochus the poet to marry his daughter to him,
but afterward retracted his promise, and refused her; upon which
Archilochus is said to have published a satire in iambic verse that
provoked him to hang himself.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-290"/><a href="#FNA-290" class="pginternal"><sup>290</sup></a> Cicero refers here to an oracle approving of his laws,
and promising Sparta prosperity as long as they were obeyed, which
Lycurgus procured from Delphi.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-291"/><a href="#FNA-291" class="pginternal"><sup>291</sup></a> <i>Pro aris et focis</i> is a proverbial expression. The
Romans, when they would say their all was at stake, could not express it
stronger than by saying they contended <i>pro aris et focis</i>, for religion
and their firesides, or, as we express it, for religion and property.</p>
</div>
<div class="FN"><p><a id="FN-292"/><a href="#FNA-292" class="pginternal"><sup>292</sup></a> Cicero, who was an Academic, gives his opinion according
to the manner of the Academics, who looked upon probability, and a
resemblance of truth, as the utmost they could arrive at.</p>
</div>

