<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>BOOK III.</h3>
			<p>I. <span class="first">When</span> Balbus had ended this discourse, then Cotta, with a smile, rejoined, You direct me too late which side to defend; for during the course of your argument I was revolving in my mind what objections to make to what you were saying, not so much for the sake of opposition, as of obliging you to explain what I did not perfectly comprehend; and as every one may use his own judgment, it is scarcely possible for me to think in every instance exactly what you wish.</p>
			<p>You have no idea, O Cotta, said Velleius, how impatient I am to hear what you have to say. For since our friend Balbus was highly delighted with your discourse against Epicurus, I ought in my turn to be solicitous to hear what you can say against the Stoics; and I therefore will give you my best attention, for I believe you are, as usual, well prepared for the engagement.</p>
			<p>I wish, by Hercules! I were, replies Cotta; for it is more difficult to dispute with Lucilius than it was with you. <a id="page-319"/><span class="pgnum">319</span>Why so? says Velleius. Because, replies Cotta, your Epicurus, in my opinion, does not contend strongly for the Gods: he only, for the sake of avoiding any unpopularity or punishment, is afraid to deny their existence; for when he asserts that the Gods are wholly inactive and regardless of everything, and that they have limbs like ours, but make no use of them, he seems to jest with us, and to think it sufficient if he allows that there are beings of any kind happy and eternal. But with regard to Balbus, I suppose you observed how many things were said by him, which, however false they may be, yet have a perfect coherence and connection; therefore, my design, as I said, in opposing him, is not so much to confute his principles as to induce him to explain what I do not clearly understand: for which reason, Balbus, I will give you the choice, either to answer me every particular as I go on, or permit me to proceed without interruption. If you want any explanation, replies Balbus, I would rather you would propose your doubts singly; but if your intention is rather to confute me than to seek instruction for yourself, it shall be as you please; I will either answer you immediately on every point, or stay till you have finished your discourse.</p>
			<p>II. Very well, says Cotta; then let us proceed as our conversation shall direct. But before I enter on the subject, I have a word to say concerning myself; for I am greatly influenced by your authority, and your exhortation at the conclusion of your discourse, when you desired me to remember that I was Cotta and Pontifex; by which I presume you intimated that I should defend the sacred rites and religion and ceremonies which we received from our ancestors. Most undoubtedly I always have, and always shall defend them, nor shall the arguments either of the learned or unlearned ever remove the opinions which I have imbibed from them concerning the worship of the immortal Gods. In matters of religion I submit to the rules of the high-priests, T. Coruncanius, P. Scipio, and P. Scævola; not to the sentiments of Zeno, Cleanthes, or Chrysippus; and I pay a greater regard to what C. Lælius, one of our augurs and wise men, has written concerning religion, in that noble oration of his, than to the most eminent of the Stoics: and as the whole religion of the Romans at <a id="page-320"/><span class="pgnum">320</span>first consisted in sacrifices and divination by birds, to which have since been added predictions, if the interpreters<a id="FNA-242"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-242"><sup>242</sup></a> of the Sibylline oracle or the aruspices have foretold any event from portents and prodigies, I have ever thought that there was no point of all these holy things which deserved to be despised. I have been even persuaded that Romulus, by instituting divination, and Numa, by establishing sacrifices, laid the foundation of Rome, which undoubtedly would never have risen to such a height of grandeur if the Gods had not been made propitious by this worship. These, Balbus, are my sentiments both as a priest and as Cotta. But you must bring me to your opinion by the force of your reason: for I have a right to demand from you, as a philosopher, a reason for the religion which you would have me embrace. But I must believe the religion of our ancestors without any proof.</p>
			<p>III. What proof, says Balbus, do you require of me? You have proposed, says Cotta, four articles. First of all, you undertook to prove that there “are Gods;” secondly, “of what kind and character they are;” thirdly, that “the universe is governed by them;” lastly, that “they provide for the welfare of mankind in particular.” Thus, if I remember rightly, you divided your discourse. Exactly so, replies Balbus; but let us see what you require.</p>
			<p>Let us examine, says Cotta, every proposition. The first one⁠—that there are Gods⁠—is never contested but by the most impious of men; nay, though it can never be rooted out of my mind, yet I believe it on the authority of our ancestors, and not on the proofs which you have brought. Why do you expect a proof from me, says Balbus, if you thoroughly believe it? Because, says Cotta, I come to this discussion as if I had never thought of the Gods, or heard anything concerning them. Take me as a disciple wholly ignorant and unbiassed, and prove to me all the points which I ask.</p>
			<p>Begin, then, replies Balbus. I would first know, says Cotta, why you have been so long in proving the existence of the Gods, which you said was a point so very evident to all, that there was no need of any proof? In that, answers <a id="page-321"/><span class="pgnum">321</span>Balbus, I have followed your example, whom I have often observed, when pleading in the Forum, to load the judge with all the arguments which the nature of your cause would permit. This also is the practice of philosophers, and I have a right to follow it. Besides, you may as well ask me why I look upon you with two eyes, since I can see you with one.</p>
			<p>IV. You shall judge, then, yourself, says Cotta, if this is a very just comparison; for, when I plead, I do not dwell upon any point agreed to be self-evident, because long reasoning only serves to confound the clearest matters; besides, though I might take this method in pleading, yet I should not make use of it in such a discourse as this, which requires the nicest distinction. And with regard to your making use of one eye only when you look on me, there is no reason for it, since together they have the same view; and since nature, to which you attribute wisdom, has been pleased to give us two passages by which we receive light. But the truth is, that it was because you did not think that the existence of the Gods was so evident as you could wish that you therefore brought so many proofs. It was sufficient for me to believe it on the tradition of our ancestors; and since you disregard authorities, and appeal to reason, permit my reason to defend them against yours. The proofs on which you found the existence of the Gods tend only to render a proposition doubtful that, in my opinion, is not so; I have not only retained in my memory the whole of these proofs, but even the order in which you proposed them. The first was, that when we lift up our eyes towards the heavens, we immediately conceive that there is some divinity that governs those celestial bodies; on which you quoted this passage⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Look up to the refulgent heaven above,</p>
				<p>Which all men call, unanimously, Jove;</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">intimating that we should invoke that as Jupiter, rather than our Capitoline Jove<a id="FNA-243"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-243"><sup>243</sup></a>, or that it is evident to the whole world that those bodies are Gods which Velleius and many others do not place even in the rank of animated beings.</p>
			<p><a id="page-322"/><span class="pgnum">322</span>Another strong proof, in your opinion, was that the belief of the existence of the Gods was universal, and that mankind was daily more and more convinced of it. What! should an affair of such importance be left to the decision of fools, who, by your sect especially, are called madmen?</p>
			<p>V. But the Gods have appeared to us, as to Posthumius at the Lake Regillus, and to Vatienus in the Salarian Way: something you mentioned, too, I know not what, of a battle of the Locrians at Sagra. Do you believe that the Tyndaridæ, as you called them; that is, men sprung from men, and who were buried in Lacedæmon, as we learn from Homer, who lived in the next age⁠—do you believe, I say, that they appeared to Vatienus on the road mounted on white horses, without any servant to attend them, to tell the victory of the Romans to a country fellow rather than to M. Cato, who was at that time the chief person of the senate? Do you take that print of a horse’s hoof which is now to be seen on a stone at Regillus to be made by Castor’s horse? Should you not believe, what is probable, that the souls of eminent men, such as the Tyndaridæ, are divine and immortal, rather than that those bodies which had been reduced to ashes should mount on horses, and fight in an army? If you say that was possible, you ought to show how it is so, and not amuse us with fabulous old women’s stories.</p>
			<p>Do you take these for fabulous stories? says Balbus. Is not the temple, built by Posthumius in honor of Castor and Pollux, to be seen in the Forum? Is not the decree of the senate concerning Vatienus still subsisting? As to the affair of Sagra, it is a common proverb among the Greeks; when they would affirm anything strongly, they say “It is as certain as what passed at Sagra.” Ought not such authorities to move you? You oppose me, replies Cotta, with stories, but I ask reasons of you<a id="FNA-244"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-244"><sup>244</sup></a>. * * *</p>
			<p>VI. We are now to speak of predictions. No one can avoid what is to come, and, indeed, it is commonly useless to know it; for it is a miserable case to be afflicted to no purpose, and not to have even the last, the common comfort, <a id="page-323"/><span class="pgnum">323</span>hope, which, according to your principles, none can have; for you say that fate governs all things, and call that fate which has been true from all eternity. What advantage, then, is the knowledge of futurity to us, or how does it assist us to guard against impending evils, since it will come inevitably?</p>
			<p>But whence comes that divination? To whom is owing that knowledge from the entrails of beasts? Who first made observations from the voice of the crow? Who invented the Lots?<a id="FNA-245"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-245"><sup>245</sup></a> Not that I give no credit to these things, or that I despise Attius Navius’s staff, which you mentioned; but I ought to be informed how these things are understood by philosophers, especially as the diviners are often wrong in their conjectures. But physicians, you say, are likewise often mistaken. What comparison can there be between divination, of the origin of which we are ignorant, and physic, which proceeds on principles intelligible to every one? You believe that the Decii,<a id="FNA-246"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-246"><sup>246</sup></a> in devoting themselves to death, appeased the Gods. How great, then, was the iniquity of the Gods that they could not be appeased but at the price of such noble blood! That was the stratagem of generals such as the Greeks call <span class="greek">στρατήγημα</span>, and it was a stratagem worthy such illustrious leaders, who consulted the public good even at the expense of their lives: they conceived rightly, what indeed happened, that if the general rode furiously upon the enemy, the whole army would follow his example. As to the voice of the Fauns, I never heard it. If you assure me that you have, I shall believe you, though I really know not what a Faun is.</p>
			<p>VII. I do not, then, O Balbus, from anything that you have said, perceive as yet that it is proved that there are Gods. I believe it, indeed, but not from any arguments of the Stoics. Cleanthes, you have said, attributes the idea that men have of the Gods to four causes. In the first place (as I have already sufficiently mentioned), to a foreknowledge <a id="page-324"/><span class="pgnum">324</span>of future events; secondly, to tempests, and other shocks of nature; thirdly, to the utility and plenty of things we enjoy; fourthly, to the invariable order of the stars and the heavens. The arguments drawn from foreknowledge I have already answered. With regard to tempests in the air, the sea, and the earth, I own that many people are affrighted by them, and imagine that the immortal Gods are the authors of them.</p>
			<p>But the question is, not whether there are people who believe that there are Gods, but whether there are Gods or not. As to the two other causes of Cleanthes, one of which is derived from the great abundance of desirable things which we enjoy, the other from the invariable order of the seasons and the heavens, I shall treat on them when I answer your discourse concerning the providence of the Gods⁠—a point, Balbus, upon which you have spoken at great length. I shall likewise defer till then examining the argument which you attribute to Chrysippus, that “if there is in nature anything which surpasses the power of man to produce, there must consequently be some being better than man.” I shall also postpone, till we come to that part of my argument, your comparison of the world to a fine house, your observations on the proportion and harmony of the universe, and those smart, short reasons of Zeno which you quote; and I shall examine at the same time your reasons drawn from natural philosophy, concerning that fiery force and that vital heat which you regard as the principle of all things; and I will investigate, in its proper place, all that you advanced the other day on the existence of the Gods, and on the sense and understanding which you attributed to the sun, the moon, and all the stars; and I shall ask you this question over and over again, By what proofs are you convinced yourself there are Gods?</p>
			<p>VIII. I thought, says Balbus, that I had brought ample proofs to establish this point. But such is your manner of opposing, that, when you seem on the point of interrogating me, and when I am preparing to answer, you suddenly divert the discourse, and give me no opportunity to reply to you; and thus those most important points concerning divination and fate are neglected which we Stoics <a id="page-325"/><span class="pgnum">325</span>have thoroughly examined, but which your school has only slightly touched upon. But they are not thought essential to the question in hand; therefore, if you think proper, do not confuse them together, that we in this discussion may come to a clear explanation of the subject of our present inquiry.</p>
			<p>Very well, says Cotta. Since, then, you have divided the whole question into four parts, and I have said all that I had to say on the first, I will take the second into consideration; in which, when you attempted to show what the character of the Gods was, you seemed to me rather to prove that there are none; for you said that it was the greatest difficulty to draw our minds from the prepossessions of the eyes; but that as nothing is more excellent than the Deity, you did not doubt that the world was God, because there is nothing better in nature than the world, and so we may reasonably think it animated, or, rather, perceive it in our minds as clearly as if it were obvious to our eyes.</p>
			<p>Now, in what sense do you say there is nothing better than the world? If you mean that there is nothing more beautiful, I agree with you; that there is nothing more adapted to our wants, I likewise agree with you: but if you mean that nothing is wiser than the world, I am by no means of your opinion. Not that I find it difficult to conceive anything in my mind independent of my eyes; on the contrary, the more I separate my mind from my eyes, the less I am able to comprehend your opinion.</p>
			<p>IX. Nothing is better than the world, you say. Nor is there, indeed, anything on earth better than the city of Rome; do you think, therefore, that our city has a mind; that it thinks and reasons; or that this most beautiful city, being void of sense, is not preferable to an ant, because an ant has sense, understanding, reason, and memory? You should consider, Balbus, what ought to be allowed you, and not advance things because they please you.</p>
			<p>For that old, concise, and, as it seemed to you, acute syllogism of Zeno has been all which you have so much enlarged upon in handling this topic: “That which reasons is superior to that which does not; nothing is superior to the world; therefore the world reasons.” If you would <a id="page-326"/><span class="pgnum">326</span>prove also that the world can very well read a book, follow the example of Zeno, and say, “That which can read is better than that which cannot; nothing is better than the world; the world therefore can read.” After the same manner you may prove the world to be an orator, a mathematician, a musician⁠—that it possesses all sciences, and, in short, is a philosopher. You have often said that God made all things, and that no cause can produce an effect unlike itself. From hence it will follow, not only that the world is animated, and is wise, but also plays upon the fiddle and the flute, because it produces men who play on those instruments. Zeno, therefore, the chief of your sect, advances no argument sufficient to induce us to think that the world reasons, or, indeed, that it is animated at all, and consequently none to think it a Deity; though it may be said that there is nothing superior to it, as there is nothing more beautiful, nothing more useful to us, nothing more adorned, and nothing more regular in its motions. But if the world, considered as one great whole, is not God, you should not surely deify, as you have done, that infinite multitude of stars which only form a part of it, and which so delight you with the regularity of their eternal courses; not but that there is something truly wonderful and incredible in their regularity; but this regularity of motion, Balbus, may as well be ascribed to a natural as to a divine cause.</p>
			<p>X. What can be more regular than the flux and reflux of the Euripus at Chalcis, the Sicilian sea, and the violence of the ocean in those parts<a id="FNA-247"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-247"><sup>247</sup></a></p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p class="£6" style="margin-left: 15ex">where the rapid tide</p>
				<p>Does Europe from the Libyan coast divide?</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">The same appears on the Spanish and British coasts. Must we conclude that some Deity appoints and directs these ebbings and flowings to certain fixed times? Consider, I pray, if everything which is regular in its motion is deemed divine, whether it will not follow that tertian and quartan agues must likewise be so, as their returns have the greatest regularity. These effects are to be explained by reason; but, because you are unable to assign any, you have recourse to a Deity as your last refuge.</p>
			<p><a id="page-327"/><span class="pgnum">327</span>The arguments of Chrysippus appeared to you of great weight; a man undoubtedly of great quickness and subtlety (I call those quick who have a sprightly turn of thought, and those subtle whose minds are seasoned by use as their hands are by labor): “If,” says he, “there is anything which is beyond the power of man to produce, the being who produces it is better than man. Man is unable to make what is in the world; the being, therefore, that could do it is superior to man. What being is there but a God superior to man? Therefore there is a God.”</p>
			<p>These arguments are founded on the same erroneous principles as Zeno’s, for he does not define what is meant by being better or more excellent, or distinguish between an intelligent cause and a natural cause. Chrysippus adds, “If there are no Gods, there is nothing better than man; but we cannot, without the highest arrogance, have this idea of ourselves.” Let us grant that it is arrogance in man to think himself better than the world; but to comprehend that he has understanding and reason, and that in Orion and Canicula there is neither, is no arrogance, but an indication of good sense. “Since we suppose,” continues he, “when we see a beautiful house, that it was built for the master, and not for mice, we should likewise judge that the world is the mansion of the Gods.” Yes, if I believed that the Gods built the world; but not if, as I believe, and intend to prove, it is the work of nature.</p>
			<p>XI. Socrates, in Xenophon, asks, “Whence had man his understanding, if there was none in the world?” And I ask, Whence had we speech, harmony, singing; unless we think it is the sun conversing with the moon when she approaches near it, or that the world forms an harmonious concert, as Pythagoras imagines? This, Balbus, is the effect of nature; not of that nature which proceeds artificially, as Zeno says, and the character of which I shall presently examine into, but a nature which, by its own proper motions and mutations, modifies everything.</p>
			<p>For I readily agree to what you said about the harmony and general agreement of nature, which you pronounced to be firmly bound and united together, as it were, by ties of blood; but I do not approve of what you added, that “it could not possibly be so, unless it were so united by <a id="page-328"/><span class="pgnum">328</span>one divine spirit.” On the contrary, the whole subsists by the power of nature, independently of the Gods, and there is a kind of sympathy (as the Greeks call it) which joins together all the parts of the universe; and the greater that is in its own power, the less is it necessary to have recourse to a divine intelligence.</p>
			<p>XII. But how will you get rid of the objections which Carneades made? “If,” says he, “there is no body immortal, there is none eternal; but there is no body immortal, nor even indivisible, or that cannot be separated and disunited; and as every animal is in its nature passive, so there is not one which is not subject to the impressions of extraneous bodies; none, that is to say, which can avoid the necessity of enduring and suffering: and if every animal is mortal, there is none immortal; so, likewise, if every animal may be cut up and divided, there is none indivisible, none eternal, but all are liable to be affected by, and compelled to submit to, external power. Every animal, therefore, is necessarily mortal, dissoluble, and divisible.”</p>
			<p>For as there is no wax, no silver, no brass which cannot be converted into something else, whatever is composed of wax, or silver, or brass may cease to be what it is. By the same reason, if all the elements are mutable, every body is mutable.</p>
			<p>Now, according to your doctrine, all the elements are mutable; all bodies, therefore, are mutable. But if there were any body immortal, then all bodies would not be mutable. Every body, then, is mortal; for every body is either water, air, fire, or earth, or composed of the four elements together, or of some of them. Now, there is not one of all these elements that does not perish; for earthly bodies are fragile: water is so soft that the least shock will separate its parts, and fire and air yield to the least impulse, and are subject to dissolution; besides, any of these elements perish when converted into another nature, as when water is formed from earth, the air from water, and the sky from air, and when they change in the same manner back again. Therefore, if there is nothing but what is perishable in the composition of all animals, there is no animal eternal.</p>
			<p>XIII. But, not to insist on these arguments, there is no <a id="page-329"/><span class="pgnum">329</span>animal to be found that had not a beginning, and will not have an end; for every animal being sensitive, they are consequently all sensible of cold and heat, sweet and bitter; nor can they have pleasing sensations without being subject to the contrary. As, therefore, they receive pleasure, they likewise receive pain; and whatever being is subject to pain must necessarily be subject to death. It must be allowed, therefore, that every animal is mortal.</p>
			<p>Besides, a being that is not sensible of pleasure or pain cannot have the essence of an animal; if, then, on the one hand, every animal must be sensible of pleasure and pain, and if, on the other, every being that has these sensations cannot be immortal, we may conclude that as there is no animal insensible, there is none immortal. Besides, there is no animal without inclination and aversion⁠—an inclination to that which is agreeable to nature, and an aversion to the contrary: there are in the case of every animal some things which they covet, and others they reject. What they reject are repugnant to their nature, and consequently would destroy them. Every animal, therefore, is inevitably subject to be destroyed. There are innumerable arguments to prove that whatever is sensitive is perishable; for cold, heat, pleasure, pain, and all that affects the sense, when they become excessive, cause destruction. Since, then, there is no animal that is not sensitive, there is none immortal.</p>
			<p>XIV. The substance of an animal is either simple or compound; simple, if it is composed only of earth, of fire, of air, or of water (and of such a sort of being we can form no idea); compound, if it is formed of different elements, which have each their proper situation, and have a natural tendency to it⁠—this element tending towards the highest parts, that towards the lowest, and another towards the middle. This conjunction may for some time subsist, but not forever; for every element must return to its first situation. No animal, therefore, is eternal.</p>
			<p>But your school, Balbus, allows fire only to be the sole active principle; an opinion which I believe you derive from Heraclitus, whom some men understand in one sense, some in another: but since he seems unwilling to be understood, we will pass him by. You Stoics, then, say that <a id="page-330"/><span class="pgnum">330</span>fire is the universal principle of all things; that all living bodies cease to live on the extinction of that heat; and that throughout all nature whatever is sensible of that heat lives and flourishes. Now, I cannot conceive that bodies should perish for want of heat, rather than for want of moisture or air, especially as they even die through excess of heat; so that the life of animals does not depend more on fire than on the other elements.</p>
			<p>However, air and water have this quality in common with fire and heat. But let us see to what this tends. If I am not mistaken, you believe that in all nature there is nothing but fire, which is self-animated. Why fire rather than air, of which the life of animals consists, and which is called from thence <i>anima</i>,<a id="FNA-248"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-248"><sup>248</sup></a> the soul? But how is it that you take it for granted that life is nothing but fire? It seems more probable that it is a compound of fire and air. But if fire is self-animated, unmixed with any other element, it must be sensitive, because it renders our bodies sensitive; and the same objection which I just now made will arise, that whatever is sensitive must necessarily be susceptible of pleasure and pain, and whatever is sensible of pain is likewise subject to the approach of death; therefore you cannot prove fire to be eternal.</p>
			<p>You Stoics hold that all fire has need of nourishment, without which it cannot possibly subsist; that the sun, moon, and all the stars are fed either with fresh or salt waters; and the reason that Cleanthes gives why the sun is retrograde, and does not go beyond the tropics in the summer or winter, is that he may not be too far from his sustenance. This I shall fully examine hereafter; but at present we may conclude that whatever may cease to be cannot of its own nature be eternal; that if fire wants sustenance, it will cease to be, and that, therefore, fire is not of its own nature eternal.</p>
			<p>XV. After all, what kind of a Deity must that be who <a id="page-331"/><span class="pgnum">331</span>is not graced with one single virtue, if we should succeed in forming this idea of such a one? Must we not attribute prudence to a Deity? a virtue which consists in the knowledge of things good, bad, and indifferent. Yet what need has a being for the discernment of good and ill who neither has nor can have any ill? Of what use is reason to him? of what use is understanding? We men, indeed, find them useful to aid us in finding out things which are obscure by those which are clear to us; but nothing can be obscure to a Deity. As to justice, which gives to every one his own, it is not the concern of the Gods; since that virtue, according to your doctrine, received its birth from men and from civil society. Temperance consists in abstinence from corporeal pleasures, and if such abstinence hath a place in heaven, so also must the pleasures abstained from. Lastly, if fortitude is ascribed to the Deity, how does it appear? In afflictions, in labor, in danger? None of these things can affect a God. How, then, can we conceive this to be a Deity that makes no use of reason, and is not endowed with any virtue?</p>
			<p>However, when I consider what is advanced by the Stoics, my contempt for the ignorant multitude vanishes. For these are their divinities. The Syrians worshipped a fish. The Egyptians consecrated beasts of almost every kind. The Greeks deified many men; as Alabandus<a id="FNA-249"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-249"><sup>249</sup></a> at Alabandæ, Tenes at Tenedos; and all Greece pay divine honors to Leucothea (who was before called Ino), to her son Palæmon, to Hercules, to Æsculapius, and to the Tyndaridæ; our own people to Romulus, and to many others, who, as citizens newly admitted into the ancient body, they imagine have been received into heaven.</p>
			<p>These are the Gods of the illiterate.</p>
			<p>XVI. What are the notions of you philosophers? In what respect are they superior to these ideas? I shall pass them over; for they are certainly very admirable. Let the world, then, be a Deity, for that, I conceive, is what you mean by</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p class="£4">The refulgent heaven above,</p>
				<p>Which all men call, unanimously, Jove.</p>
			</div>
			<p><a id="page-332"/><span class="pgnum">332</span>But why are we to add many more Gods? What a multitude of them there is! At least, it seems so to me; for every constellation, according to you, is a Deity: to some you give the name of beasts, as the goat, the scorpion, the bull, the lion; to others the names of inanimate things, as the ship, the altar, the crown.</p>
			<p>But supposing these were to be allowed, how can the rest be granted, or even so much as understood? When we call corn Ceres, and wine Bacchus, we make use of the common manner of speaking; but do you think any one so mad as to believe that his food is a Deity? With regard to those who, you say, from having been men became Gods, I should be very willing to learn of you, either how it was possible formerly, or, if it had ever been, why is it not so now? I do not conceive, as things are at present, how Hercules,</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Burn’d with fiery torches on Mount Œta,</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">as Accius says, should rise, with the flames,</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>To the eternal mansions of his father.</p>
			</div>
			<p>Besides, Homer also says that Ulysses<a id="FNA-250"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-250"><sup>250</sup></a> met him in the shades below, among the other dead.</p>
			<p>But yet I should be glad to know which Hercules we should chiefly worship; for they who have searched into those histories, which are but little known, tell us of several. The most ancient is he who fought with Apollo about the Tripos of Delphi, and is son of Jupiter and Lisyto; and of the most ancient Jupiters too, for we find many Jupiters also in the Grecian chronicles. The second is the Egyptian Hercules, and is believed to be the son of Nilus, and to be the author of the Phrygian characters. The third, to whom they offered sacrifices, is one of the <a id="page-333"/><span class="pgnum">333</span>Idæi Dactyli.<a id="FNA-251"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-251"><sup>251</sup></a> The fourth is the son of Jupiter and Asteria, the sister of Latona, chiefly honored by the Tyrians, who pretend that Carthago<a id="FNA-252"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-252"><sup>252</sup></a> is his daughter. The fifth, called Belus, is worshipped in India. The sixth is the son of Alcmena by Jupiter; but by the third Jupiter, for there are many Jupiters, as you shall soon see.</p>
			<p>XVII. Since this examination has led me so far, I will convince you that in matters of religion I have learned more from the pontifical rites, the customs of our ancestors, and the vessels of Numa,<a id="FNA-253"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-253"><sup>253</sup></a> which Lælius mentions in his little Golden Oration, than from all the learning of the Stoics; for tell me, if I were a disciple of your school, what answer could I make to these questions? If there are Gods, are nymphs also Goddesses? If they are Goddesses, are Pans and Satyrs in the same rank? But they are not; consequently, nymphs are not Goddesses. Yet they have temples publicly dedicated to them. What do you conclude from thence? Others who have temples are not therefore Gods. But let us go on. You call Jupiter and Neptune Gods; their brother Pluto, then, is one; and if so, those rivers also are Deities which they say flow in the infernal regions⁠—Acheron, Cocytus, Pyriphlegethon; Charon also, and Cerberus, are Gods; but that cannot be allowed; nor can Pluto be placed among the Deities. What, then, will you say of his brothers?</p>
			<p>Thus reasons Carneades; not with any design to destroy the existence of the Gods (for what would less become a philosopher?), but to convince us that on that matter the Stoics have said nothing plausible. If, then, Jupiter and Neptune are Gods, adds he, can that divinity be denied to their father Saturn, who is principally worshipped throughout the West? If Saturn is a God, then must his father, Cœlus, be one too, and so must the parents of Cœlus, which are the Sky and Day, as also their brothers and sisters, which by ancient genealogists are <a id="page-334"/><span class="pgnum">334</span>thus named: Love, Deceit, Fear, Labor, Envy, Fate, Old Age, Death, Darkness, Misery, Lamentation, Favor, Fraud, Obstinacy, the Destinies, the Hesperides, and Dreams; all which are the offspring of Erebus and Night. These monstrous Deities, therefore, must be received, or else those from whom they sprung must be disallowed.</p>
			<p>XVIII. If you say that Apollo, Vulcan, Mercury, and the rest of that sort are Gods, can you doubt the divinity of Hercules and Æsculapius, Bacchus, Castor and Pollux? These are worshipped as much as those, and even more in some places. Therefore they must be numbered among the Gods, though on the mother’s side they are only of mortal race. Aristæus, who is said to have been the son of Apollo, and to have found out the art of making oil from the olive; Theseus, the son of Neptune; and the rest whose fathers were Deities, shall they not be placed in the number of the Gods? But what think you of those whose mothers were Goddesses? They surely have a better title to divinity; for, in the civil law, as he is a freeman who is born of a freewoman, so, in the law of nature, he whose mother is a Goddess must be a God. The isle Astypalæa religiously honor Achilles; and if he is a Deity, Orpheus and Rhesus are so, who were born of one of the Muses; unless, perhaps, there may be a privilege belonging to sea marriages which land marriages have not. Orpheus and Rhesus are nowhere worshipped; and if they are therefore not Gods, because they are nowhere worshipped as such, how can the others be Deities? You, Balbus, seemed to agree with me that the honors which they received were not from their being regarded as immortals, but as men richly endued with virtue.</p>
			<p>But if you think Latona a Goddess, how can you avoid admitting Hecate to be one also, who was the daughter of Asteria, Latona’s sister? Certainly she is one, if we may judge by the altars erected to her in Greece. And if Hecate is a Goddess, how can you refuse that rank to the Eumenides? for they also have a temple at Athens, and, if I understand right, the Romans have consecrated a grove to them. The Furies, too, whom we look upon as the inspectors into and scourges of impiety, I suppose, must have their divinity too. As you hold that there is some divinity <a id="page-335"/><span class="pgnum">335</span>presides over every human affair, there is one who presides over the travail of matrons, whose name, <i>Natio</i>, is derived <i>a nascentibus</i>, from nativities, and to whom we used to sacrifice in our processions in the fields of Ardæa; but if she is a Deity, we must likewise acknowledge all those you mentioned, Honor, Faith, Intellect, Concord; by the same rule also, Hope, Juno, Moneta,<a id="FNA-254"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-254"><sup>254</sup></a> and every idle phantom, every child of our imagination, are Deities. But as this consequence is quite inadmissible, do not you either defend the cause from which it flows.</p>
			<p>XIX. What say you to this? If these are Deities, which we worship and regard as such, why are not Serapis and Isis<a id="FNA-255"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-255"><sup>255</sup></a> placed in the same rank? And if they are admitted, what reason have we to reject the Gods of the barbarians? Thus we should deify oxen, horses, the ibis, hawks, asps, crocodiles, fishes, dogs, wolves, cats, and many other beasts. If we go back to the source of this superstition, we must equally condemn all the Deities from which they proceed. Shall Ino, whom the Greeks call Leucothea, and we Matuta, be reputed a Goddess, because she was the daughter of Cadmus, and shall that title be refused to Circe and Pasiphae,<a id="FNA-256"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-256"><sup>256</sup></a> who had the sun for their father, and Perseis, daughter of the Ocean, for their mother? It is true, Circe has divine honors paid her by our colony of Circæum; therefore you call her a Goddess; but what will you say of Medea, the granddaughter of the Sun and the Ocean, and daughter of Æetes and Idyia? What will you say of her brother Absyrtus, whom Pacuvius calls Ægialeus, though the other name is more frequent in the writings of the ancients? If you did not deify one as well as the other, what will become of Ino? for all these Deities have the same origin.</p>
			<p>Shall Amphiaraus and Tryphonius be called Gods? Our publicans, when some lands in Bœotia were exempted from the tax, as belonging to the immortal Gods, denied that <a id="page-336"/><span class="pgnum">336</span>any were immortal who had been men. But if you deify these, Erechtheus surely is a God, whose temple and priest we have seen at Athens. And can you, then, refuse to acknowledge also Codrus, and many others who shed their blood for the preservation of their country? And if it is not allowable to consider all these men as Gods, then, certainly, probabilities are not in favor of our acknowledging the <i>Divinity</i> of those previously mentioned beings from whom these have proceeded.</p>
			<p>It is easy to observe, likewise, that if in many countries people have paid divine honors to the memory of those who have signalized their courage, it was done in order to animate others to practise virtue, and to expose themselves the more willingly to dangers in their country’s cause. From this motive the Athenians have deified Erechtheus and his daughters, and have erected also a temple, called Leocorion, to the daughters of Leus.<a id="FNA-257"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-257"><sup>257</sup></a> Alabandus is more honored in the city which he founded than any of the more illustrious Deities; from thence Stratonicus had a pleasant turn⁠—as he had many⁠—when he was troubled with an impertinent fellow who insisted that Alabandus was a God, but that Hercules was not; “Very well,” says he, “then let the anger of Alabandus fall upon me, and that of Hercules upon you.”</p>
			<p>XX. Do you not consider, Balbus, to what lengths your arguments for the divinity of the heaven and the stars will carry you? You deify the sun and the moon, which the Greeks take to be Apollo and Diana. If the moon is a Deity, the morning-star, the other planets, and all the fixed stars are also Deities; and why shall not the rainbow be placed in that number? for it is so wonderfully beautiful that it is justly said to be the daughter of Thaumas.<a id="FNA-258"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-258"><sup>258</sup></a> But if you deify the rainbow, what regard will you pay to the clouds? for the colors which appear in the bow are only formed of the clouds, one of which is said to have brought forth the Centaurs; and if you deify the clouds, you cannot pay less regard to the seasons, which the Roman people have really consecrated. Tempests, showers, <a id="page-337"/><span class="pgnum">337</span>storms, and whirlwinds must then be Deities. It is certain, at least, that our captains used to sacrifice a victim to the waves before they embarked on any voyage.</p>
			<p>As you deify the earth under the name of Ceres,<a id="FNA-259"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-259"><sup>259</sup></a> because, as you said, she bears fruits (<i>a gerendo</i>), and the ocean under that of Neptune, rivers and fountains have the same right. Thus we see that Maso, the conqueror of Corsica, dedicated a temple to a fountain, and the names of the Tiber, Spino, Almo, Nodinus, and other neighboring rivers are in the prayers<a id="FNA-260"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-260"><sup>260</sup></a> of the augurs. Therefore, either the number of such Deities will be infinite, or we must admit none of them, and wholly disapprove of such an endless series of superstition.</p>
			<p>XXI. None of all these assertions, then, are to be admitted. I must proceed now, Balbus, to answer those who say that, with regard to those deified mortals, so religiously and devoutly reverenced, the public opinion should have the force of reality. To begin, then: they who are called theologists say that there are three Jupiters; the first and second of whom were born in Arcadia; one of whom was the son of Æther, and father of Proserpine and Bacchus; the other the son of Cœlus, and father of Minerva, who is called the Goddess and inventress of war; the third one born of Saturn in the isle of Crete,<a id="FNA-261"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-261"><sup>261</sup></a> where his sepulchre is shown. The sons of Jupiter (<span class="greek">Διόσκουροι</span>) also, among the Greeks, have many names; first, the three who at Athens have the title of Anactes,<a id="FNA-262"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-262"><sup>262</sup></a> Tritopatreus, Eubuleus, and Dionysus, sons of the most ancient king Jupiter and Proserpine; the next are Castor and Pollux, sons of the third Jupiter and Leda; and, lastly, three others, by some called Alco,<a id="FNA-263"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-263"><sup>263</sup></a> Melampus, and Tmolus, sons of Atreus, the son of Pelops.</p>
			<p><a id="page-338"/><span class="pgnum">338</span>As to the Muses, there were at first four⁠—Thelxiope, Aœde, Arche, and Melete⁠—daughters of the second Jupiter; afterward there were nine, daughters of the third Jupiter and Mnemosyne; there were also nine others, having the same appellations, born of Pierus and Antiopa, by the poets usually called Pierides and Pieriæ. Though <i>Sol</i> (the sun) is so called, you say, because he is <i>solus</i> (single); yet how many suns do theologists mention? There is one, the son of Jupiter and grandson of Æther; another, the son of Hyperion; a third, who, the Egyptians say, was of the city Heliopolis, sprung from Vulcan, the son of Nilus; a fourth is said to have been born at Rhodes of Acantho, in the times of the heroes, and was the grandfather of Jalysus, Camirus, and Lindus; a fifth, of whom, it is pretended, Aretes and Circe were born at Colchis.</p>
			<p>XXII. There are likewise several Vulcans. The first (who had of Minerva that Apollo whom the ancient historians call the tutelary God of Athens) was the son of Cœlus; the second, whom the Egyptians call Opas,<a id="FNA-264"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-264"><sup>264</sup></a> and whom they looked upon as the protector of Egypt, is the son of Nilus; the third, who is said to have been the master of the forges at Lemnos, was the son of the third Jupiter and of Juno; the fourth, who possessed the islands near Sicily called Vulcaniæ,<a id="FNA-265"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-265"><sup>265</sup></a> was the son of Menalius. One Mercury had Cœlus for his father and Dies for his mother; another, who is said to dwell in a cavern, and is the same as Trophonius, is the son of Valens and Phoronis. A third, of whom, and of Penelope, Pan was the offspring, is the son of the third Jupiter and Maia. A fourth, whom the Egyptians think it a crime to name, is the son of Nilus. A fifth, whom we call, in their language, Thoth, as with them the first month of the year is called, is he whom the people of Pheneum<a id="FNA-266"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-266"><sup>266</sup></a> worship, and who is said to have killed Argus, to have fled for it into Egypt, and to have given laws and learning to the Egyptians. The first of the Æsculapii, the God of Arcadia, who is said to have invented the probe and to have been the first person who taught men to use bandages for wounds, is the son of <a id="page-339"/><span class="pgnum">339</span>Apollo. The second, who was killed with thunder, and is said to be buried in Cynosura,<a id="FNA-267"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-267"><sup>267</sup></a> is the brother of the second Mercury. The third, who is said to have found out the art of purging the stomach, and of drawing teeth, is the son of Arsippus and Arsinoe; and in Arcadia there is shown his tomb, and the wood which is consecrated to him, near the river Lusium.</p>
			<p>XXIII. I have already spoken of the most ancient of the Apollos, who is the son of Vulcan, and tutelar God of Athens. There is another, son of Corybas, and native of Crete, for which island he is said to have contended with Jupiter himself. A third, who came from the regions of the Hyperborei<a id="FNA-268"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-268"><sup>268</sup></a> to Delphi, is the son of the third Jupiter and of Latona. A fourth was of Arcadia, whom the Arcadians called Nomio,<a id="FNA-269"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-269"><sup>269</sup></a> because they regarded him as their legislator. There are likewise many Dianas. The first, who is thought to be the mother of the winged Cupid, is the daughter of Jupiter and Proserpine. The second, who is more known, is daughter of the third Jupiter and of Latona. The third, whom the Greeks often call by her father’s name, is the daughter of Upis<a id="FNA-270"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-270"><sup>270</sup></a> and Glauce. There are many also of the Dionysi. The first was the son of Jupiter and Proserpine. The second, who is said to have killed Nysa, was the son of Nilus. The third, who reigned in Asia, and for whom the Sabazia<a id="FNA-271"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-271"><sup>271</sup></a> were instituted, was the son of Caprius. The fourth, for whom they celebrate the Orphic festivals, sprung from Jupiter and Luna. The fifth, who is supposed to have instituted the Trieterides, was the son of Nysus and Thyone.</p>
			<p>The first Venus, who has a temple at Elis, was the daughter of Cœlus and Dies. The second arose out of the froth of the sea, and became, by Mercury, the mother of the second Cupid. The third, the daughter of Jupiter and Diana, was married to Vulcan, but is said to have had Anteros by Mars. The fourth was a Syrian, born of Tyro, who is called Astarte, and is said to have been married to <a id="page-340"/><span class="pgnum">340</span>Adonis. I have already mentioned one Minerva, mother of Apollo. Another, who is worshipped at Sais, a city in Egypt, sprung from Nilus. The third, whom I have also mentioned, was daughter of Jupiter. The fourth, sprung from Jupiter and Coryphe, the daughter of the Ocean; the Arcadians call her Coria, and make her the inventress of chariots. A fifth, whom they paint with wings at her heels, was daughter of Pallas, and is said to have killed her father for endeavoring to violate her chastity. The first Cupid is said to be the son of Mercury and the first Diana; the second, of Mercury and the second Venus; the third, who is the same as Anteros, of Mars and the third Venus.</p>
			<p>All these opinions arise from old stories that were spread in Greece; the belief in which, Balbus, you well know, ought to be stopped, lest religion should suffer. But you Stoics, so far from refuting them, even give them authority by the mysterious sense which you pretend to find in them. Can you, then, think, after this plain refutation, that there is need to employ more subtle reasonings? But to return from this digression.</p>
			<p>XXIV. We see that the mind, faith, hope, virtue, honor, victory, health, concord, and things of such kind, are purely natural, and have nothing of divinity in them; for either they are inherent in us, as the mind, faith, hope, virtue, and concord are; or else they are to be desired, as honor, health, and victory. I know indeed that they are useful to us, and see that statues have been religiously erected for them; but as to their divinity, I shall begin to believe it when you have proved it for certain. Of this kind I may particularly mention Fortune, which is allowed to be ever inseparable from inconstancy and temerity, which are certainly qualities unworthy of a divine being.</p>
			<p>But what delight do you take in the explication of fables, and in the etymology of names?⁠—that Cœlus was castrated by his son, and that Saturn was bound in chains by his son! By your defence of these and such like fictions you would make the authors of them appear not only not to be madmen, but to have been even very wise. But the pains which you take with your etymologies deserve our pity. That Saturn is so called because <i>se saturat annis</i>, he is full of years; Mavors, Mars, because <i>magna <a id="page-341"/><span class="pgnum">341</span>vortit</i>, he brings about mighty changes; Minerva, because <i>minuit</i>, she diminishes, or because <i>minatur</i>, she threatens; Venus, because <i>venit ad omnia</i>, she comes to all; Ceres, <i>a gerendo</i>, from bearing. How dangerous is this method! for there are many names would puzzle you. >From what would you derive Vejupiter and Vulcan? Though, indeed, if you can derive Neptune <i>a nando</i>, from swimming, in which you seem to me to flounder about yourself more than Neptune, you may easily find the origin of all names, since it is founded only upon the conformity of some one letter. Zeno first, and after him Cleanthes and Chrysippus, are put to the unnecessary trouble of explaining mere fables, and giving reasons for the several appellations of every Deity; which is really owning that those whom we call Gods are not the representations of deities, but natural things, and that to judge otherwise is an error.</p>
			<p>XXV. Yet this error has so much prevailed that even pernicious things have not only the title of divinity ascribed to them, but have also sacrifices offered to them; for Fever has a temple on the Palatine hill, and Orbona another near that of the Lares, and we see on the Esquiline hill an altar consecrated to Ill-fortune. Let all such errors be banished from philosophy, if we would advance, in our dispute concerning the immortal Gods, nothing unworthy of immortal beings. I know myself what I ought to believe; which is far different from what you have said. You take Neptune for an intelligence pervading the sea. You have the same opinion of Ceres with regard to the earth. I cannot, I own, find out, or in the least conjecture, what that intelligence of the sea or the earth is. To learn, therefore, the existence of the Gods, and of what description and character they are, I must apply elsewhere, not to the Stoics.</p>
			<p>Let us proceed to the two other parts of our dispute: first, “whether there is a divine providence which governs the world;” and lastly, “whether that providence particularly regards mankind;” for these are the remaining propositions of your discourse; and I think that, if you approve of it, we should examine these more accurately. With all my heart, says Velleius, for I readily agree to what you have hitherto said, and expect still greater things from you.</p>
			<p>I am unwilling to interrupt you, says Balbus to Cotta, <a id="page-342"/><span class="pgnum">342</span>but we shall take another opportunity, and I shall effectually convince you. But<a id="FNA-272"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-272"><sup>272</sup></a> * * *</p>
			<p class="nodist">XXVI.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Shall I adore, and bend the suppliant knee,</p>
				<p>Who scorn their power and doubt their deity?</p>
			</div>
			<p>Does not Niobe here seem to reason, and by that reasoning to bring all her misfortunes upon herself? But what a subtle expression is the following!</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>On strength of will alone depends success;</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">a maxim capable of leading us into all that is bad.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Though I’m confined, his malice yet is vain,</p>
				<p>His tortured heart shall answer pain for pain;</p>
				<p>His ruin soothe my soul with soft content,</p>
				<p>Lighten my chains, and welcome banishment!</p>
			</div>
			<p>This, now, is reason; that reason which you say the divine goodness has denied to the brute creation, kindly to bestow it on men alone. How great, how immense the favor! Observe the same Medea flying from her father and her country:</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>The guilty wretch from her pursuer flies.</p>
				<p>By her own hands the young Absyrtus slain,</p>
				<p>His mangled limbs she scatters o’er the plain,</p>
				<p>That the fond sire might sink beneath his woe,</p>
				<p>And she to parricide her safety owe.</p>
			</div>
			<p>Reflection, as well as wickedness, must have been necessary to the preparation of such a fact; and did he too, who prepared that fatal repast for his brother, do it without reflection?</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Revenge as great as Atreus’ injury</p>
				<p>Shall sink his soul and crown his misery.</p>
			</div>
			<p>XXVII. Did not Thyestes himself, not content with having defiled his brother’s bed (of which Atreus with great justice thus complains,</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>When faithless comforts, in the lewd embrace,</p>
				<p>With vile adultery stain a royal race,</p>
				<p>The blood thus mix’d in fouler currents flows,</p>
				<p>Taints the rich soil, and breeds unnumber’d woes)⁠—</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont"><a id="page-343"/><span class="pgnum">343</span>did he not, I say, by that adultery, aim at the possession of the crown? Atreus thus continues:</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>A lamb, fair gift of heaven, with golden fleece,</p>
				<p>Promised in vain to fix my crown in peace;</p>
				<p>But base Thyestes, eager for the prey,</p>
				<p>Crept to my bed, and stole the gem away.</p>
			</div>
			<p>Do you not perceive that Thyestes must have had a share of reason proportionable to the greatness of his crimes⁠—such crimes as are not only represented to us on the stage, but such as we see committed, nay, often exceeded, in the common course of life? The private houses of individual citizens, the public courts, the senate, the camp, our allies, our provinces, all agree that reason is the author of all the ill, as well as of all the good, which is done; that it makes few act well, and that but seldom, but many act ill, and that frequently; and that, in short, the Gods would have shown greater benevolence in denying us any reason at all than in sending us that which is accompanied with so much mischief; for as wine is seldom wholesome, but often hurtful in diseases, we think it more prudent to deny it to the patient than to run the risk of so uncertain a remedy; so I do not know whether it would not be better for mankind to be deprived of wit, thought, and penetration, or what we call reason, since it is a thing pernicious to many and very useful to few, than to have it bestowed upon them with so much liberality and in such abundance. But if the divine will has really consulted the good of man in this gift of reason, the good of those men only was consulted on whom a well-regulated one is bestowed: how few those are, if any, is very apparent. We cannot admit, therefore, that the Gods consulted the good of a few only; the conclusion must be that they consulted the good of none.</p>
			<p>XXVIII. You answer that the ill use which a great part of mankind make of reason no more takes away the goodness of the Gods, who bestow it as a present of the greatest benefit to them, than the ill use which children make of their patrimony diminishes the obligation which they have to their parents for it. We grant you this; but where is the similitude? It was far from Deianira’s design to injure Hercules when she made him a present <a id="page-344"/><span class="pgnum">344</span>of the shirt dipped in the blood of the Centaurs. Nor was it a regard to the welfare of Jason of Pheræ that influenced the man who with his sword opened his imposthume, which the physicians had in vain attempted to cure. For it has often happened that people have served a man whom they intended to injure, and have injured one whom they designed to serve; so that the effect of the gift is by no means always a proof of the intention of the giver; neither does the benefit which may accrue from it prove that it came from the hands of a benefactor. For, in short, what debauchery, what avarice, what crime among men is there which does not owe its birth to thought and reflection, that is, to reason? For all opinion is reason: right reason, if men’s thoughts are conformable to truth; wrong reason, if they are not. The Gods only give us the mere faculty of reason, if we have any; the use or abuse of it depends entirely upon ourselves; so that the comparison is not just between the present of reason given us by the Gods, and a patrimony left to a son by his father; for, after all, if the injury of mankind had been the end proposed by the Gods, what could they have given them more pernicious than reason? for what seed could there be of injustice, intemperance, and cowardice, if reason were not laid as the foundation of these vices?</p>
			<p>XXIX. I mentioned just now Medea and Atreus, persons celebrated in heroic poems, who had used this reason only for the contrivance and practice of the most flagitious crimes; but even the trifling characters which appear in comedies supply us with the like instances of this reasoning faculty; for example, does not he, in the Eunuch, reason with some subtlety?⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>What, then, must I resolve upon?</p>
				<p>She turn’d me out-of-doors; she sends for me back again;</p>
				<p>Shall I go? no, not if she were to beg it of me.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">Another, in the Twins, making no scruple of opposing a received maxim, after the manner of the Academics, asserts that when a man is in love and in want, it is pleasant</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>To have a father covetous, crabbed, and passionate,</p>
				<p>Who has no love or affection for his children.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont"><a id="page-345"/><span class="pgnum">345</span>This unaccountable opinion he strengthens thus:</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>You may defraud him of his profits, or forge letters in his name,</p>
				<p>Or fright him by your servant into compliance;</p>
				<p>And what you take from such an old hunks,</p>
				<p>How much more pleasantly do you spend it!</p>
			</div>
			<p>On the contrary, he says that an easy, generous father is an inconvenience to a son in love; for, says he,</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>I can’t tell how to abuse so good, so prudent a parent,</p>
				<p>Who always foreruns my desires, and meets me purse in hand,</p>
				<p>To support me in my pleasures: this easy goodness and generosity</p>
				<p>Quite defeat all my frauds, tricks, and stratagems.<a id="FNA-273"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-273"><sup>273</sup></a></p>
			</div>
			<p>What are these frauds, tricks, and stratagems but the effects of reason? O excellent gift of the Gods! Without this Phormio could not have said,</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Find me out the old man: I have something hatching for him in my head.</p>
			</div>
			<p>XXX. But let us pass from the stage to the bar. The prætor<a id="FNA-274"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-274"><sup>274</sup></a> takes his seat. To judge whom? The man who set fire to our archives. How secretly was that villany conducted! Q. Sosius, an illustrious Roman knight, of the Picene field,<a id="FNA-275"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-275"><sup>275</sup></a> confessed the fact. Who else is to be tried? He who forged the public registers⁠—Alenus, an artful fellow, who counterfeited the handwriting of the six officers.<a id="FNA-276"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-276"><sup>276</sup></a> Let us call to mind other trials: that on the subject of the gold of Tolosa, or the conspiracy of Jugurtha. Let us trace back the informations laid against Tubulus for bribery in his judicial office; and, since that, the proceedings of the tribune Peduceus concerning the <a id="page-346"/><span class="pgnum">346</span>incest of the vestals. Let us reflect upon the trials which daily happen for assassinations, poisonings, embezzlement of public money, frauds in wills, against which we have a new law; then that action against the advisers or assisters of any theft; the many laws concerning frauds in guardianship, breaches of trust in partnerships and commissions in trade, and other violations of faith in buying, selling, borrowing, or lending; the public decree on a private affair by the Lætorian Law;<a id="FNA-277"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-277"><sup>277</sup></a> and, lastly, that scourge of all dishonesty, the law against fraud, proposed by our friend Aquillius; that sort of fraud, he says, by which one thing is pretended and another done. Can we, then, think that this plentiful fountain of evil sprung from the immortal Gods? If they have given reason to man, they have likewise given him subtlety, for subtlety is only a deceitful manner of applying reason to do mischief. To them likewise we must owe deceit, and every other crime, which, without the help of reason, would neither have been thought of nor committed. As the old woman wished</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>That to the fir which on Mount Pelion grew</p>
				<p>The axe had ne’er been laid,<a id="FNA-278"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-278"><sup>278</sup></a></p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">so we should wish that the Gods had never bestowed this ability on man, the abuse of which is so general that the small number of those who make a good use of it are often oppressed by those who make a bad use of it; so that it seems to be given rather to help vice than to promote virtue among us.</p>
			<p>XXXI. This, you insist on it, is the fault of man, and not of the Gods. But should we not laugh at a physician or pilot, though they are weak mortals, if they were to lay the blame of their ill success on the violence of the disease or the fury of the tempest? Had there not been danger, <a id="page-347"/><span class="pgnum">347</span>we should say, who would have applied to you? This reasoning has still greater force against the Deity. The fault, you say, is in man, if he commits crimes. But why was not man endued with a reason incapable of producing any crimes? How could the Gods err? When we leave our effects to our children, it is in hopes that they may be well bestowed; in which we may be deceived, but how can the Deity be deceived? As Phœbus when he trusted his chariot to his son Phaëthon, or as Neptune when he indulged his son Theseus in granting him three wishes, the consequence of which was the destruction of Hippolitus? These are poetical fictions; but truth, and not fables, ought to proceed from philosophers. Yet if those poetical Deities had foreseen that their indulgence would have proved fatal to their sons, they must have been thought blamable for it.</p>
			<p>Aristo of Chios used often to say that the philosophers do hurt to such of their disciples as take their good doctrine in a wrong sense; thus the lectures of Aristippus might produce debauchees, and those of Zeno pedants. If this be true, it were better that philosophers should be silent than that their disciples should be corrupted by a misapprehension of their master’s meaning; so if reason, which was bestowed on mankind by the Gods with a good design, tends only to make men more subtle and fraudulent, it had been better for them never to have received it. There could be no excuse for a physician who prescribes wine to a patient, knowing that he will drink it and immediately expire. Your Providence is no less blamable in giving reason to man, who, it foresaw, would make a bad use of it. Will you say that it did not foresee it? Nothing could please me more than such an acknowledgment. But you dare not. I know what a sublime idea you entertain of her.</p>
			<p>XXXII. But to conclude. If folly, by the unanimous consent of philosophers, is allowed to be the greatest of all evils, and if no one ever attained to true wisdom, we, whom they say the immortal Gods take care of, are consequently in a state of the utmost misery. For that nobody is well, or that nobody can be well, is in effect the same thing; and, in my opinion, that no man is truly wise, or that no <a id="page-348"/><span class="pgnum">348</span>man can be truly wise, is likewise the same thing. But I will insist no further on so self-evident a point. Telamon in one verse decides the question. If, says he, there is a Divine Providence,</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Good men would be happy, bad men miserable.</p>
			</div>
			<p class="cont">But it is not so. If the Gods had regarded mankind, they should have made them all virtuous; but if they did not regard the welfare of all mankind, at least they ought to have provided for the happiness of the virtuous. Why, therefore, was the Carthaginian in Spain suffered to destroy those best and bravest men, the two Scipios? Why did Maximus<a id="FNA-279"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-279"><sup>279</sup></a> lose his son, the consul? Why did Hannibal kill Marcellus? Why did Cannæ deprive us of Paulus? Why was the body of Regulus delivered up to the cruelty of the Carthaginians? Why was not Africanus protected from violence in his own house? To these, and many more ancient instances, let us add some of later date. Why is Rutilius, my uncle, a man of the greatest virtue and learning, now in banishment? Why was my own friend and companion Drusus assassinated in his own house? Why was Scævola, the high-priest, that pattern of moderation and prudence, massacred before the statue of Vesta? Why, before that, were so many illustrious citizens put to death by Cinna? Why had Marius, the most perfidious of men, the power to cause the death of Catulus, a man of the greatest dignity? But there would be no end of enumerating examples of good men made miserable and wicked men prosperous. Why did that Marius live to an old age, and die so happily at his own house in his seventh consulship? Why was that inhuman wretch Cinna permitted to enjoy so long a reign?</p>
			<p>XXXIII. He, indeed, met with deserved punishment at last. But would it not have been better that these inhumanities had been prevented than that the author of them should be punished afterward? Varius, a most impious wretch, was tortured and put to death. If this was his punishment for the murdering Drusus by the sword, and Metellus by poison, would it not have been better to have preserved their lives than to have their deaths avenged on <a id="page-349"/><span class="pgnum">349</span>Varius? Dionysius was thirty-eight years a tyrant over the most opulent and flourishing city; and, before him, how many years did Pisistratus tyrannize in the very flower of Greece! Phalaris and Apollodorus met with the fate they deserved, but not till after they had tortured and put to death multitudes. Many robbers have been executed; but the number of those who have suffered for their crimes is short of those whom they have robbed and murdered. Anaxarchus,<a id="FNA-280"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-280"><sup>280</sup></a> a scholar of Democritus, was cut to pieces by command of the tyrant of Cyprus; and Zeno of Elea<a id="FNA-281"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-281"><sup>281</sup></a> ended his life in tortures. What shall I say of Socrates,<a id="FNA-282"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-282"><sup>282</sup></a> whose death, as often as I read of it in Plato, draws fresh tears from my eyes? If, therefore, the Gods really see everything that happens to men, you must acknowledge they make no distinction between the good and the bad.</p>
			<p>XXXIV. Diogenes the Cynic used to say of Harpalus, one of the most fortunate villains of his time, that the constant prosperity of such a man was a kind of witness against the Gods. Dionysius, of whom we have before spoken, after he had pillaged the temple of Proserpine at Locris, set sail for Syracuse, and, having a fair wind during his voyage, said, with a smile, “See, my friends, what favorable winds the immortal Gods bestow upon church-robbers.” Encouraged by this prosperous event, he proceeded in his impiety. When he landed at Peloponnesus, he went into the temple of Jupiter Olympius, and disrobed his statue of a golden mantle of great weight, an ornament which the tyrant Gelo<a id="FNA-283"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-283"><sup>283</sup></a> had given out of the spoils of the Carthaginians, and at the same time, in a jesting manner, he said “that a golden mantle was too heavy in summer and too cold in winter;” and then, throwing a woollen cloak over the statue, added, “This will serve for all seasons.” At another time, he ordered the golden beard of Æsculapius of Epidaurus to be taken away, saying that “it <a id="page-350"/><span class="pgnum">350</span>was absurd for the son to have a beard, when his father had none.” He likewise robbed the temples of the silver tables, which, according to the ancient custom of Greece, bore this inscription, “To the good Gods,” saying “he was willing to make use of their goodness;” and, without the least scruple, took away the little golden emblems of victory, the cups and coronets, which were in the stretched-out hands of the statues, saying “he did not take, but receive them; for it would be folly not to accept good things from the Gods, to whom we are constantly praying for favors, when they stretch out their hands towards us.” And, last of all, all the things which he had thus pillaged from the temples were, by his order, brought to the market-place and sold by the common crier; and, after he had received the money for them, he commanded every purchaser to restore what he had bought, within a limited time, to the temples from whence they came. Thus to his impiety towards the Gods he added injustice to man.</p>
			<p>XXXV. Yet neither did Olympian Jove strike him with his thunder, nor did Æsculapius cause him to die by tedious diseases and a lingering death. He died in his bed, had funeral honors<a id="FNA-284"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-284"><sup>284</sup></a> paid to him, and left his power, which he had wickedly obtained, as a just and lawful inheritance to his son.</p>
			<p>It is not without concern that I maintain a doctrine which seems to authorize evil, and which might probably give a sanction to it, if conscience, without any divine assistance, did not point out, in the clearest manner, the difference between virtue and vice. Without conscience man is contemptible. For as no family or state can be supposed to be formed with any reason or discipline if there are no rewards for good actions nor punishment for crimes, so we cannot believe that a Divine Providence regulates the world if there is no distinction between the honest and the wicked.</p>
			<p><a id="page-351"/><span class="pgnum">351</span>But the Gods, you say, neglect trifling things: the little fields or vineyards of particular men are not worthy their attention; and if blasts or hail destroy their product, Jupiter does not regard it, nor do kings extend their care to the lower offices of government. This argument might have some weight if, in bringing Rutilius as an instance, I had only complained of the loss of his farm at Formiæ; but I spoke of a personal misfortune, his banishment.<a id="FNA-285"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-285"><sup>285</sup></a></p>
			<p>XXXVI. All men agree that external benefits, such as vineyards, corn, olives, plenty of fruit and grain, and, in short, every convenience and property of life, are derived from the Gods; and, indeed, with reason, since by our virtue we claim applause, and in virtue we justly glory, which we could have no right to do if it was the gift of the Gods, and not a personal merit. When we are honored with new dignities, or blessed with increase of riches; when we are favored by fortune beyond our expectation, or luckily delivered from any approaching evil, we return thanks for it to the Gods, and assume no praise to ourselves. But who ever thanked the Gods that he was a good man? We thank them, indeed, for riches, health, and honor. For these we invoke the all-good and all-powerful Jupiter; but not for wisdom, temperance, and justice. No one ever offered a tenth of his estate to Hercules to be made wise. It is reported, indeed, of Pythagoras that he sacrificed an ox to the Muses upon having made some new discovery in geometry;<a id="FNA-286"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-286"><sup>286</sup></a> but, for my part, I cannot believe it, because he refused to sacrifice even to Apollo at Delos, lest he should defile the altar with blood. But to return. It is universally agreed that good fortune we must ask of the Gods, but wisdom must arise from ourselves; and though temples have been consecrated to the Mind, to Virtue, and to Faith, yet that does not contradict their being <a id="page-352"/><span class="pgnum">352</span>inherent in us. In regard to hope, safety, assistance, and victory, we must rely upon the Gods for them; from whence it follows, as Diogenes said, that the prosperity of the wicked destroys the idea of a Divine Providence.</p>
			<p>XXXVII. But good men have sometimes success. They have so; but we cannot, with any show of reason, attribute that success to the Gods. Diagoras, who is called the atheist, being at Samothrace, one of his friends showed him several pictures<a id="FNA-287"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-287"><sup>287</sup></a> of people who had endured very dangerous storms; “See,” says he, “you who deny a providence, how many have been saved by their prayers to the Gods.” “Ay,” says Diagoras, “I see those who were saved, but where are those painted who were shipwrecked?” At another time, he himself was in a storm, when the sailors, being greatly alarmed, told him they justly deserved that misfortune for admitting him into their ship; when he, pointing to others under the like distress, asked them “if they believed Diagoras was also aboard those ships?” In short, with regard to good or bad fortune, it matters not what you are, or how you have lived. The Gods, like kings, regard not everything. What similitude is there between them? If kings neglect anything, want of knowledge may be pleaded in their defence; but ignorance cannot be brought as an excuse for the Gods.</p>
			<p>XXXVIII. Your manner of justifying them is somewhat extraordinary, when you say that if a wicked man dies without suffering for his crimes, the Gods inflict a punishment on his children, his children’s children, and all his posterity. O wonderful equity of the Gods! What city would endure the maker of a law which should condemn a son or a grandson for a crime committed by the father or the grandfather?</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<p>Shall Tantalus’ unhappy offspring know</p>
				<p>No end, no close, of this long scene of woe?</p>
				<p>When will the dire reward of guilt be o’er,</p>
				<p>And Myrtilus demand revenge no more?<a id="FNA-288"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-288"><sup>288</sup></a></p>
			</div>
			<p>Whether the poets have corrupted the Stoics, or the Stoics given authority to the poets, I cannot easily determine. Both alike are to be condemned. If those persons <a id="page-353"/><span class="pgnum">353</span>whose names have been branded in the satires of Hipponax or Archilochus<a id="FNA-289"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-289"><sup>289</sup></a> were driven to despair, it did not proceed from the Gods, but had its origin in their own minds. When we see Ægistus and Paris lost in the heat of an impure passion, why are we to attribute it to a Deity, when the crime, as it were, speaks for itself? I believe that those who recover from illness are more indebted to the care of Hippocrates than to the power of Æsculapius; that Sparta received her laws from Lycurgus<a id="FNA-290"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-290"><sup>290</sup></a> rather than from Apollo; that those eyes of the maritime coast, Corinth and Carthage, were plucked out, the one by Critolaus, the other by Hasdrubal, without the assistance of any divine anger, since you yourselves confess that a Deity cannot possibly be angry on any provocation.</p>
			<p>XXXIX. But could not the Deity have assisted and preserved those eminent cities? Undoubtedly he could; for, according to your doctrine, his power is infinite, and without the least labor; and as nothing but the will is necessary to the motion of our bodies, so the divine will of the Gods, with the like ease, can create, move, and change all things. This you hold, not from a mere phantom of superstition, but on natural and settled principles of reason; for matter, you say, of which all things are composed and consist, is susceptible of all forms and changes, and there is nothing which cannot be, or cease to be, in an instant; and that Divine Providence has the command and disposal of this universal matter, and consequently can, in any part of the universe, do whatever she pleases: from whence I conclude that this Providence either knows not the extent of her power, or neglects human affairs, or cannot judge what is best for us. Providence, you say, does not extend her care to particular men; there <a id="page-354"/><span class="pgnum">354</span>is no wonder in that, since she does not extend it to cities, or even to nations, or people. If, therefore, she neglects whole nations, is it not very probable that she neglects all mankind? But how can you assert that the Gods do not enter into all the little circumstances of life, and yet hold that they distribute dreams among men? Since you believe in dreams, it is your part to solve this difficulty. Besides, you say we ought to call upon the Gods. Those who call upon the Gods are individuals. Divine Providence, therefore, regards individuals, which consequently proves that they are more at leisure than you imagine. Let us suppose the Divine Providence to be greatly busied; that it causes the revolutions of the heavens, supports the earth, and rules the seas; why does it suffer so many Gods to be unemployed? Why is not the superintendence of human affairs given to some of those idle Deities which you say are innumerable?</p>
			<p>This is the purport of what I had to say concerning “the Nature of the Gods;” not with a design to destroy their existence, but merely to show what an obscure point it is, and with what difficulties an explanation of it is attended.</p>
			<p>XL. Balbus, observing that Cotta had finished his discourse⁠—You have been very severe, says he, against a Divine Providence, a doctrine established by the Stoics with piety and wisdom; but, as it grows too late, I shall defer my answer to another day. Our argument is of the greatest importance; it concerns our altars,<a id="FNA-291"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-291"><sup>291</sup></a> our hearths, our temples, nay, even the walls of our city, which you priests hold sacred; you, who by religion defend Rome better than she is defended by her ramparts. This is a cause which, while I have life, I think I cannot abandon without impiety.</p>
			<p>There is nothing, replied Cotta, which I desire more than to be confuted. I have not pretended to decide this point, but to give you my private sentiments upon it; and am very sensible of your great superiority in argument. <a id="page-355"/><span class="pgnum">355</span>No doubt of it, says Velleius; we have much to fear from one who believes that our dreams are sent from Jupiter, which, though they are of little weight, are yet of more importance than the discourse of the Stoics concerning the nature of the Gods. The conversation ended here, and we parted. Velleius judged that the arguments of Cotta were truest; but those of Balbus seemed to me to have the greater probability.<a id="FNA-292"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FN-292"><sup>292</sup></a></p>
			<h2>FOOTNOTES:</h2>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-72"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-72"><sup>72</sup></a> Some read <i>scientiam</i> and some <i>inscientiam;</i> the latter of which is preferred by some of the best editors and commentators.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-73"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-73"><sup>73</sup></a> For a short account of these ancient Greek philosophers, see the sketch prefixed to the Academics (<i>Classical Library</i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-74"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-74"><sup>74</sup></a> Cicero wrote his philosophical works in the last three years of his life. When he wrote this piece, he was in the sixty-third year of his age, in the year of Rome 709.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-75"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-75"><sup>75</sup></a> The Academic.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-76"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-76"><sup>76</sup></a> Diodorus and Posidonius were Stoics; Philo and Antiochus were Academics; but the latter afterward inclined to the doctrine of the Stoics.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-77"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-77"><sup>77</sup></a> Julius Cæsar.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-78"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-78"><sup>78</sup></a> Cicero was one of the College of Augurs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-79"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-79"><sup>79</sup></a> The Latinæ Feriæ was originally a festival of the Latins, altered by Tarquinius Superbus into a Roman one. It was held in the Alban Mount, in honor of Jupiter Latiaris. This holiday lasted six days: it was not held at any fixed time; but the consul was never allowed to take the field till he had held them.⁠—<i>Vide</i> Smith, Dict. Gr. and Rom. Ant., p. 414.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-80"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-80"><sup>80</sup></a> <i>Exhedra</i>, the word used by Cicero, means a study, or place where disputes were held.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-81"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-81"><sup>81</sup></a> M. Piso was a Peripatetic. The four great sects were the Stoics, the Peripatetics, the Academics, and the Epicureans.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-82"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-82"><sup>82</sup></a> It was a prevailing tenet of the Academics that there is no certain knowledge.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-83"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-83"><sup>83</sup></a> The five forms of Plato are these: <span class="greek">οὐσία, ταὐτὸν, ἕτερον, στάσις, κίνησις.</span></p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-84"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-84"><sup>84</sup></a> The four natures here to be understood are the four elements⁠—fire, water, air, and earth; which are mentioned as the four principles of Empedocles by Diogenes Laertius.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-85"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-85"><sup>85</sup></a> These five moving stars are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and Venus. Their revolutions are considered in the next book.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-86"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-86"><sup>86</sup></a> Or, Generation of the Gods.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-87"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-87"><sup>87</sup></a> The <span class="greek">πρόληψις</span> of Epicurus, before mentioned, is what he here means.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-88"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-88"><sup>88</sup></a> <span class="greek">Στερέμνια</span> is the word which Epicurus used to distinguish between those objects which are perceptible to sense, and those which are imperceptible; as the essence of the Divine Being, and the various operations of the divine power.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-89"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-89"><sup>89</sup></a> Zeno here mentioned is not the same that Cotta spoke of before. This was the founder of the Stoics. The other was an Epicurean philosopher whom he had heard at Athens.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-90"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-90"><sup>90</sup></a> That is, there would be the same uncertainty in heaven as is among the Academics.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-91"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-91"><sup>91</sup></a> Those nations which were neither Greek nor Roman.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-92"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-92"><sup>92</sup></a> <i>Sigilla numerantes</i> is the common reading; but P. Manucius proposes <i>venerantes</i>, which I choose as the better of the two, and in which sense I have translated it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-93"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-93"><sup>93</sup></a> Fundamental doctrines.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-94"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-94"><sup>94</sup></a> That is, the zodiac.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-95"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-95"><sup>95</sup></a> The moon, as well as the sun, is indeed in the zodiac, but she does not measure the same course in a month. She moves in another line of the zodiac nearer the earth.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-96"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-96"><sup>96</sup></a> According to the doctrines of Epicurus, none of these bodies themselves are clearly seen, but <i>simulacra ex corporibus effluentia</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-97"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-97"><sup>97</sup></a> Epicurus taught his disciples in a garden.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-98"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-98"><sup>98</sup></a> By the word <i>Deus</i>, as often used by our author, we are to understand all the Gods in that theology then treated of, and not a single personal Deity.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-99"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-99"><sup>99</sup></a> The best commentators on this passage agree that Cicero does not mean that Aristotle affirmed that there was no such person as Orpheus, but that there was no such poet, and that the verse called Orphic was said to be the invention of another. The passage of Aristotle to which Cicero here alludes has, as Dr. Davis observes, been long lost.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-100"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-100"><sup>100</sup></a> A just proportion between the different sorts of beings.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-101"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-101"><sup>101</sup></a> Some give <i>quos non pudeat earum Epicuri vocum;</i> but the best copies have not <i>non;</i> nor would it be consistent with Cotta to say <i>quos non pudeat</i>, for he throughout represents Velleius as a perfect Epicurean in every article.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-102"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-102"><sup>102</sup></a> His country was Abdera, the natives of which were remarkable for their stupidity.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-103"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-103"><sup>103</sup></a> This passage will not admit of a translation answerable to the sense of the original. Cicero says the word <i>amicitia</i> (friendship) is derived from <i>amor</i> (love or affection).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-104"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-104"><sup>104</sup></a> This manner of speaking of Jupiter frequently occurs in Homer,</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>⸺⁠<span class="greek">πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε,</span></p>
				</div>
				<p>and has been used by Virgil and other poets since Ennius.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-105"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-105"><sup>105</sup></a> Perses, or Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, was taken by Cnæus Octavius, the prætor, and brought as prisoner to Paullus Æmilius, 167 <span class="sc">b.c.</span></p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-106"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-106"><sup>106</sup></a> An exemption from serving in the wars, and from paying public taxes.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-107"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-107"><sup>107</sup></a> Mopsus. There were two soothsayers of this name: the first was one of the Lapithæ, son of Ampycus and Chloris, called also the son of Apollo and Hienantis; the other a son of Apollo and Manto, who is said to have founded Mallus, in Asia Minor, where his oracle existed as late as the time of Strabo.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-108"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-108"><sup>108</sup></a> Tiresias was the great Theban prophet at the time of the war of the Seven against Thebes.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-109"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-109"><sup>109</sup></a> Amphiaraus was King of Argos (he had been one of the Argonauts also). He was killed after the war of the Seven against Thebes, which he was compelled to join in by the treachery of his wife Eriphyle, by the earth opening and swallowing him up as he was fleeing from Periclymenus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-110"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-110"><sup>110</sup></a> Calchas was the prophet of the Grecian army at the siege of Troy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-111"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-111"><sup>111</sup></a> Helenus was a son of Priam and Hecuba. He is represented as a prophet in the Philoctetes of Sophocles. And in the Æneid he is also represented as king of part of Epirus, and as predicting to Æneas the dangers and fortunes which awaited him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-112"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-112"><sup>112</sup></a> This short passage would be very obscure to the reader without an explanation from another of Cicero’s treatises. The expression here, <i>ad investigandum suem regiones vineæ terminavit</i>, which is a metaphor too bold, if it was not a sort of augural language, seems to me to have been the effect of carelessness in our great author; for Navius did not divide the regions, as he calls them, of the vine to find his sow, but to find a grape.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-113"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-113"><sup>113</sup></a> The Peremnia were a sort of auspices performed just before the passing a river.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-114"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-114"><sup>114</sup></a> The Acumina were a military auspices, and were partly performed on the point of a spear, from which they were called Acumina.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-115"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-115"><sup>115</sup></a> Those were called <i>testamenta in procinctu</i>, which were made by soldiers just before an engagement, in the presence of men called as witnesses.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-116"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-116"><sup>116</sup></a> This especially refers to the Decii, one of whom devoted himself for his country in the war with the Latins, 340 <span class="sc">b.c.</span>, and his son imitated the action in the war with the Samnites, 295 <span class="sc">b.c.</span> Cicero (Tusc. i. 37) says that his son did the same thing in the war with Pyrrhus at the battle of Asculum, though in other places (De Off. iii. 4) he speaks of only two Decii as having signalized themselves in this manner.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-117"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-117"><sup>117</sup></a> The Rogator, who collected the votes, and pronounced who was the person chosen. There were two sorts of Rogators; one was the officer here mentioned, and the other was the Rogator, or speaker of the whole assembly.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-118"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-118"><sup>118</sup></a> Which was Sardinia, as appears from one of Cicero’s epistles to his brother Quintus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-119"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-119"><sup>119</sup></a> Their sacred books of ceremonies.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-120"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-120"><sup>120</sup></a> The war between Octavius and Cinna, the consuls.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-121"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-121"><sup>121</sup></a> This, in the original, is a fragment of an old Latin verse,</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>
						<i>⸺⁠Terram fumare calentem.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-122"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-122"><sup>122</sup></a> The Latin word is <i>principatus</i>, which exactly corresponds with the Greek word here used by Cicero; by which is to be understood the superior, the most prevailing excellence in every kind and species of things through the universe.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-123"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-123"><sup>123</sup></a> The passage of Aristotle to which Cicero here refers is lost.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-124"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-124"><sup>124</sup></a> He means the Epicureans.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-125"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-125"><sup>125</sup></a> Here the Stoic speaks too plain to be misunderstood. His world, his <i>mundus</i>, is the universe, and that universe is his great Deity, <i>in quo sit totius naturæ principatus</i>, in which the superior excellence of universal nature consists.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-126"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-126"><sup>126</sup></a> Athens, the seat of learning and politeness, of which Balbus will not allow Epicurus to be worthy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-127"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-127"><sup>127</sup></a> This is Pythagoras’s doctrine, as appears in Diogenes Laertius.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-128"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-128"><sup>128</sup></a> He here alludes to mathematical and geometrical instruments.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-129"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-129"><sup>129</sup></a> Balbus here speaks of the fixed stars, and of the motions of the orbs of the planets. He here alludes, says M. Bonhier, to the different and diurnal motions of these stars; one sort from east to west, the other from one tropic to the other: and this is the construction which our learned and great geometrician and astronomer, Dr. Halley, made of this passage.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-130"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-130"><sup>130</sup></a> This mensuration of the year into three hundred and sixty-five days and near six hours (by the odd hours and minutes of which, in every fifth year, the <i>dies intercalaris</i>, or leap-year, is made) could not but be known, Dr. Halley states, by Hipparchus, as appears from the remains of that great astronomer of the ancients. We are inclined to think that Julius Cæsar had divided the year, according to what we call the Julian year, before Cicero wrote this book; for we see, in the beginning of it, how pathetically he speaks of Cæsar’s usurpation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-131"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-131"><sup>131</sup></a> The words of Censorinus, on this occasion, are to the same effect. The opinions of philosophers concerning this great year are very different; but the institution of it is ascribed to Democritus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-132"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-132"><sup>132</sup></a> The zodiac.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-133"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-133"><sup>133</sup></a> Though Mars is said to hold his orbit in the zodiac with the rest, and to finish his revolution through the same orbit (that is, the zodiac) with the other two, yet Balbus means in a different line of the zodiac.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-134"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-134"><sup>134</sup></a> According to late observations, it never goes but a sign and a half from the sun.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-135"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-135"><sup>135</sup></a> These, Dr. Davis says, are “aërial fires;” concerning which he refers to the second book of Pliny.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-136"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-136"><sup>136</sup></a> In the Eunuch of Terence.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-137"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-137"><sup>137</sup></a> Bacchus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-138"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-138"><sup>138</sup></a> The son of Ceres.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-139"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-139"><sup>139</sup></a> The books of Ceremonies.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-140"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-140"><sup>140</sup></a> This Libera is taken for Proserpine, who, with her brother Liber, was consecrated by the Romans; all which are parts of nature in prosopopœias. Cicero, therefore, makes Balbus distinguish between the person Liber, or Bacchus, and the Liber which is a part of nature in prosopopœia.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-141"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-141"><sup>141</sup></a> These allegorical fables are largely related by Hesiod in his Theogony.</p>
				<p>Horace says exactly the same thing:</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>Hâc arte Pollux et vagus Hercules</p>
					<p>Enisus arces attigit igneas:</p>
					<p class="£2">Quos inter Augustus recumbens</p>
					<p class="£4">Purpureo bibit ore nectar.</p>
					<p>Hâc te merentem, Bacche pater, tuæ</p>
					<p>Vexere tigres indocili jugum</p>
					<p class="£2">Collo ferentes: hâc Quirinus</p>
					<p class="£4">Martis equis Acheronta fugit.⁠—Hor. iii. 3. 9.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-142"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-142"><sup>142</sup></a> Cicero means by <i>conversis casibus</i>, varying the cases from the common rule of declension; that is, by departing from the true grammatical rules of speech; for if we would keep to it, we should decline the word <i>Jupiter</i>, <i>Jupiteris</i> in the second case, etc.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p>
					<a id="FN-143"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-143">
						<sup>143</sup>
					</a>
					<i>Pater divûmque hominumque.</i>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-144"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-144"><sup>144</sup></a> The common reading is, <i>planiusque alio loco idem;</i> which, as Dr. Davis observes, is absurd; therefore, in his note, he prefers <i>planius quam alia loco idem</i>, from two copies, in which sense I have translated it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-145"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-145"><sup>145</sup></a> From the verb <i>gero</i>, to bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-146"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-146"><sup>146</sup></a> That is, “mother earth.”</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-147"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-147"><sup>147</sup></a> Janus is said to be the first who erected temples in Italy, and instituted religious rites, and from whom the first month in the Roman calendar is derived.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p>
					<a id="FN-148"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-148">
						<sup>148</sup>
					</a>
					<i>Stellæ vagantes.</i>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-149"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-149"><sup>149</sup></a> <i>Noctu quasi diem efficeret.</i> Ben Jonson says the same thing:</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>Thou that mak’st a day of night,</p>
					<p>Goddess excellently bright.⁠—<i>Ode to the Moon.</i></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-150"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-150"><sup>150</sup></a> Olympias was the mother of Alexander.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-151"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-151"><sup>151</sup></a> Venus is here said to be one of the names of Diana, because <i>ad res omnes veniret;</i> but she is not supposed to be the same as the mother of Cupid.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-152"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-152"><sup>152</sup></a> Here is a mistake, as Fulvius Ursinus observes; for the discourse seems to be continued in one day, as appears from the beginning of this book. This may be an inadvertency of Cicero.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-153"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-153"><sup>153</sup></a> The senate of Athens was so called from the words <span class="greek">Ἄρειος Πάγος</span>, the Village, some say the Hill, of Mars.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-154"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-154"><sup>154</sup></a> Epicurus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-155"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-155"><sup>155</sup></a> The Stoics.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-156"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-156"><sup>156</sup></a> By <i>nulla cohærendi natura</i>⁠—if it is the right, as it is the common reading⁠—Cicero must mean the same as by <i>nulla crescendi natura</i>, or <i>coalescendi</i>, either of which Lambinus proposes; for, as the same learned critic well observes, is there not a cohesion of parts in a clod, or in a piece of stone? Our learned Walker proposes <i>sola cohærendi natura</i>, which mends the sense very much; and I wish he had the authority of any copy for it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-157"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-157"><sup>157</sup></a> Nasica Scipio, the censor, is said to have been the first who made a water-clock in Rome.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-158"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-158"><sup>158</sup></a> The Epicureans.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-159"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-159"><sup>159</sup></a> An old Latin poet, commended by Quintilian for the gravity of his sense and his loftiness of style.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-160"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-160"><sup>160</sup></a> The shepherd is here supposed to take the stem or beak of the ship for the mouth, from which the roaring voices of the sailors came. <i>Rostrum</i> is here a lucky word to put in the mouth of one who never saw a ship before, as it is used for the beak of a bird, the snout of a beast or fish, and for the stem of a ship.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-161"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-161"><sup>161</sup></a> The Epicureans.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-162"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-162"><sup>162</sup></a> Greek, <span class="greek">ἀὴρ</span>; Latin, <i>aer</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-163"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-163"><sup>163</sup></a> The treatise of Aristotle, from whence this is taken, is lost.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-164"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-164"><sup>164</sup></a> To the universe the Stoics certainly annexed the idea of a limited space, otherwise they could not have talked of a middle; for there can be no middle but of a limited space: infinite space can have no middle, there being infinite extension from every part.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-165"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-165"><sup>165</sup></a> These two contrary reversions are from the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. They are the extreme bounds of the sun’s course. The reader must observe that the astronomical parts of this book are introduced by the Stoic as proofs of design and reason in the universe; and, notwithstanding the errors in his planetary system, his intent is well answered, because all he means is that the regular motions of the heavenly bodies, and their dependencies, are demonstrations of a divine mind. The inference proposed to be drawn from his astronomical observations is as just as if his system was in every part unexceptionably right: the same may be said of his anatomical observations.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-166"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-166"><sup>166</sup></a> In the zodiac.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-167"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-167"><sup>167</sup></a> Ibid.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-168"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-168"><sup>168</sup></a> These verses of Cicero are a translation from a Greek poem of Aratus, called the Phænomena.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-169"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-169"><sup>169</sup></a> The fixed stars.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-170"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-170"><sup>170</sup></a> The arctic and antarctic poles.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-171"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-171"><sup>171</sup></a> The two Arctoi are northern constellations. Cynosura is what we call the Lesser Bear; Helice, the Greater Bear; in Latin, <i>Ursa Minor</i> and <i>Ursa Major</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-172"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-172"><sup>172</sup></a> These stars in the Greater Bear are vulgarly called the “Seven Stars,” or the “Northern Wain;” by the Latins, “Septentriones.”</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-173"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-173"><sup>173</sup></a> The Lesser Bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-174"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-174"><sup>174</sup></a> The Greater Bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-175"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-175"><sup>175</sup></a> Exactly agreeable to this and the following description of the Dragon is the same northern constellation described in the map by Flamsteed in his Atlas Cœlestis; and all the figures here described by Aratus nearly agree with the maps of the same constellations in the Atlas Cœlestis, though they are not all placed precisely alike.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-176"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-176"><sup>176</sup></a> The tail of the Greater Bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-177"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-177"><sup>177</sup></a> That is, in Macedon, where Aratus lived.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-178"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-178"><sup>178</sup></a> The true interpretation of this passage is as follows: Here in Macedon, says Aratus, the head of the Dragon does not entirely immerge itself in the ocean, but only touches the superficies of it. By <i>ortus</i> and <i>obitus</i> I doubt not but Cicero meant, agreeable to Aratus, those parts which arise to view, and those which are removed from sight.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-179"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-179"><sup>179</sup></a> These are two northern constellations. Engonasis, in some catalogues called Hercules, because he is figured kneeling <span class="greek">ἐν γόνασιν</span> (on his knees). <span class="greek">Ἐνγόνασιν καλέουσ’</span>, as Aratus says, they call Engonasis.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-180"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-180"><sup>180</sup></a> The crown is placed under the feet of Hercules in the Atlas Cœlestis; but Ophiuchus (<span class="greek">Ὀφιοῦχος</span>), the Snake-holder, is placed in the map by Flamsteed as described here by Aratus; and their heads almost meet.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-181"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-181"><sup>181</sup></a> The Scorpion. Ophiuchus, though a northern constellation, is not far from that part of the zodiac where the Scorpion is, which is one of the six southern signs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-182"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-182"><sup>182</sup></a> The Wain of seven stars.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-183"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-183"><sup>183</sup></a> The Wain-driver. This northern constellation is, in our present maps, figured with a club in his right hand behind the Greater Bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-184"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-184"><sup>184</sup></a> In some modern maps Arcturus, a star of the first magnitude, is placed in the belt that is round the waist of Boötes. Cicero says <i>subter præcordia</i>, which is about the waist; and Aratus says <span class="greek">ὑπὸ ζώνῃ</span>, under the belt.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-185"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-185"><sup>185</sup></a> <i>Sub caput Arcti</i>, under the head of the Greater Bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-186"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-186"><sup>186</sup></a> The Crab is, by the ancients and moderns, placed in the zodiac, as here, between the Twins and the Lion; and they are all three northern signs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-187"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-187"><sup>187</sup></a> The Twins are placed in the zodiac with the side of one to the northern hemisphere, and the side of the other to the southern hemisphere. Auriga, the Charioteer, is placed in the northern hemisphere near the zodiac, by the Twins; and at the head of the Charioteer is Helice, the Greater Bear, placed; and the Goat is a bright star of the first magnitude placed on the left shoulder of this northern constellation, and called <i>Capra</i>, the Goat. <i>Hœdi</i>, the Kids, are two more stars of the same constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-188"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-188"><sup>188</sup></a> A constellation; one of the northern signs in the zodiac, in which the Hyades are placed.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-189"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-189"><sup>189</sup></a> One of the feet of Cepheus, a northern constellation, is under the tail of the Lesser Bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-190"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-190"><sup>190</sup></a> Grotius, and after him Dr. Davis, and other learned men, read <i>Cassiepea</i>, after the Greek <span class="greek">Κασσίεπεια</span>, and reject the common reading, <i>Cassiopea</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-191"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-191"><sup>191</sup></a> These northern constellations here mentioned have been always placed together as one family with Cepheus and Perseus, as they are in our modern maps.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-192"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-192"><sup>192</sup></a> This alludes to the fable of Perseus and Andromeda.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-193"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-193"><sup>193</sup></a> Pegasus, who is one of Perseus and Andromeda’s family.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-194"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-194"><sup>194</sup></a> That is, with wings.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-195"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-195"><sup>195</sup></a> <i>Aries</i>, the Ram, is the first northern sign in the zodiac; <i>Pisces</i>, the Fishes, the last southern sign; therefore they must be near one another, as they are in a circle or belt. In Flamsteed’s Atlas Cœlestis one of the Fishes is near the head of the Ram, and the other near the Urn of Aquarius.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-196"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-196"><sup>196</sup></a> These are called Virgiliæ by Cicero; by Aratus, the Pleiades, <span class="greek">Πληϊάδες</span>; and they are placed at the neck of the Bull; and one of Perseus’s feet touches the Bull in the Atlas Cœlestis.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-197"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-197"><sup>197</sup></a> This northern constellation is called Fides by Cicero; but it must be the same with Lyra; because Lyra is placed in our maps as Fides is here.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-198"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-198"><sup>198</sup></a> This is called Ales Avis by Cicero; and I doubt not but the northern constellation Cygnus is here to be understood, for the description and place of the Swan in the Atlas Cœlestis are the same which Ales Avis has here.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-199"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-199"><sup>199</sup></a> Pegasus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-200"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-200"><sup>200</sup></a> The Water-bearer, one of the six southern signs in the zodiac: he is described in our maps pouring water out of an urn, and leaning with one hand on the tail of Capricorn, another southern sign.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-201"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-201"><sup>201</sup></a> When the sun is in Capricorn, the days are at the shortest; and when in Cancer, at the longest.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-202"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-202"><sup>202</sup></a> One of the six southern signs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-203"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-203"><sup>203</sup></a> Sagittarius, another southern sign.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-204"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-204"><sup>204</sup></a> A northern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-205"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-205"><sup>205</sup></a> A northern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-206"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-206"><sup>206</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-207"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-207"><sup>207</sup></a> This is Canis Major, a southern constellation. Orion and the Dog are named together by Hesiod, who flourished many hundred years before Cicero or Aratus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-208"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-208"><sup>208</sup></a> A southern constellation, placed as here in the Atlas Cœlestis.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-209"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-209"><sup>209</sup></a> A southern constellation, so called from the ship Argo, in which Jason and the rest of the Argonauts sailed on their expedition to Colchos.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-210"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-210"><sup>210</sup></a> The Ram is the first of the northern signs in the zodiac; and the last southern sign is the Fishes; which two signs, meeting in the zodiac, cover the constellation called Argo.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-211"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-211"><sup>211</sup></a> The river Eridanus, a southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-212"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-212"><sup>212</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-213"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-213"><sup>213</sup></a> This is called the Scorpion in the original of Aratus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-214"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-214"><sup>214</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-215"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-215"><sup>215</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-216"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-216"><sup>216</sup></a> The Serpent is not mentioned in Cicero’s translation; but it is in the original of Aratus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-217"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-217"><sup>217</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-218"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-218"><sup>218</sup></a> The Goblet, or Cup, a southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-219"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-219"><sup>219</sup></a> A southern constellation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-220"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-220"><sup>220</sup></a> Antecanis, a southern constellation, is the Little Dog, and called <i>Antecanis</i> in Latin, and <span class="greek">Προκύων</span> in Greek, because he rises before the other Dog.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-221"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-221"><sup>221</sup></a> Pansætius, a Stoic philosopher.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-222"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-222"><sup>222</sup></a> Mercury and Venus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-223"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-223"><sup>223</sup></a> The proboscis of the elephant is frequently called a hand, because it is as useful to him as one. “They breathe, drink, and smell, with what may not be improperly called a hand,” says Pliny, bk. viii. c. 10.⁠—<span class="sc">Davis</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-224"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-224"><sup>224</sup></a> The passage of Aristotle’s works to which Cicero here alludes is entirely lost; but Plutarch gives a similar account.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-225"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-225"><sup>225</sup></a> Balbus does not tell us the remedy which the panther makes use of; but Pliny is not quite so delicate: he says, <i>excrementis hominis sibi medetur</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-226"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-226"><sup>226</sup></a> Aristotle says they purge themselves with this herb after they fawn. Pliny says both before and after.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-227"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-227"><sup>227</sup></a> The cuttle-fish has a bag at its neck, the black blood of which the Romans used for ink. It was called <i>atramentum</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-228"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-228"><sup>228</sup></a> The Euphrates is said to carry into Mesopotamia a large quantity of citrons, with which it covers the fields.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-229"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-229"><sup>229</sup></a> Q. Curtius, and some other authors, say the Ganges is the largest river in India; but Ammianus Marcellinus concurs with Cicero in calling the river Indus the largest of all rivers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-230"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-230"><sup>230</sup></a> These Etesian winds return periodically once a year, and blow at certain seasons, and for a certain time.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-231"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-231"><sup>231</sup></a> Some read <i>mollitur</i>, and some <i>molitur;</i> the latter of which P. Manucius justly prefers, from the verb <i>molo</i>, <i>molis;</i> from whence, says he, <i>molares dentes</i>, the grinders.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-232"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-232"><sup>232</sup></a> The weasand, or windpipe.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-233"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-233"><sup>233</sup></a> The epiglottis, which is a cartilaginous flap in the shape of a tongue, and therefore called so.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-234"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-234"><sup>234</sup></a> Cicero is here giving the opinion of the ancients concerning the passage of the chyle till it is converted to blood.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-235"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-235"><sup>235</sup></a> What Cicero here calls the ventricles of the heart are likewise called auricles, of which there is the right and left.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-236"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-236"><sup>236</sup></a> The Stoics and Peripatetics said that the nerves, veins, and arteries come directly from the heart. According to the anatomy of the moderns, they come from the brain.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-237"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-237"><sup>237</sup></a> The author means all musical instruments, whether string or wind instruments, which are hollow and tortuous.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-238"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-238"><sup>238</sup></a> The Latin version of Cicero is a translation from the Greek of Aratus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-239"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-239"><sup>239</sup></a> Chrysippus’s meaning is, that the swine is so inactive and slothful a beast that life seems to be of no use to it but to keep it from putrefaction, as salt keeps dead flesh.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-240"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-240"><sup>240</sup></a> <i>Ales</i>, in the general signification, is any large bird; and <i>oscinis</i> is any singing bird. But they here mean those birds which are used in augury: <i>alites</i> are the birds whose flight was observed by the augurs, and <i>oscines</i> the birds from whose voices they augured.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-241"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-241"><sup>241</sup></a> As the Academics doubted everything, it was indifferent to them which side of a question they took.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-242"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-242"><sup>242</sup></a> The keepers and interpreters of the Sibylline oracles were the Quindecimviri.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-243"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-243"><sup>243</sup></a> The popular name of Jupiter in Rome, being looked upon as defender of the Capitol (in which he was placed), and stayer of the State.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-244"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-244"><sup>244</sup></a> Some passages of the original are here wanting. Cotta continues speaking against the doctrine of the Stoics.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-245"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-245"><sup>245</sup></a> The word <i>sortes</i> is often used for the answers of the oracles, or, rather, for the rolls in which the answers were written.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-246"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-246"><sup>246</sup></a> Three of this eminent family sacrificed themselves for their country; the father in the Latin war, the son in the Tuscan war, and the grandson in the war with Pyrrhus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-247"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-247"><sup>247</sup></a> The Straits of Gibraltar.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-248"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-248"><sup>248</sup></a> The common reading is, <i>ex quo anima dicitur;</i> but Dr. Davis and M. Bouhier prefer <i>animal</i>, though they keep <i>anima</i> in the text, because our author says elsewhere, <i>animum ex anima dictum</i>, Tusc. I. 1. Cicero is not here to be accused of contradictions, for we are to consider that he speaks in the characters of other persons; but there appears to be nothing in these two passages irreconcilable, and probably <i>anima</i> is the right word here.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-249"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-249"><sup>249</sup></a> He is said to have led a colony from Greece into Caria, in Asia, and to have built a town, and called it after his own name, for which his countrymen paid him divine honors after his death.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-250"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-250"><sup>250</sup></a> Our great author is under a mistake here. Homer does not say he met Hercules himself, but his <span class="greek">Εἴδωλον</span>, his “visionary likeness;” and adds that he himself</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p class="£6" style="margin-left: 15ex">
						<span class="greek">μετ’ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="greek">τέρπεται ἐν θαλίῃς, καὶ ἔχει καλλίσφυρου Ἥβην,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="greek">παῖδα Διὸς μεγάλοιο καὶ Ἥρης χρυσοπεδίλου.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>which Pope translates⁠—</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>A shadowy form, for high in heaven’s abodes</p>
					<p>Himself resides, a God among the Gods;</p>
					<p>There, in the bright assemblies of the skies,</p>
					<p>He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-251"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-251"><sup>251</sup></a> They are said to have been the first workers in iron. They were called Idæi, because they inhabited about Mount Ida in Crete, and Dactyli, from <span class="greek">δάκτυλοι</span> (the fingers), their number being five.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-252"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-252"><sup>252</sup></a> From whom, some say, the city of that name was called.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-253"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-253"><sup>253</sup></a> Capedunculæ seem to have been bowls or cups, with handles on each side, set apart for the use of the altar.⁠—<span class="sc">Davis</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-254"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-254"><sup>254</sup></a> See Cicero de Divinatione, and Ovid. Fast.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-255"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-255"><sup>255</sup></a> In the consulship of Piso and Gabinius sacrifices to Serapis and Isis were prohibited in Rome; but the Roman people afterward placed them again in the number of their gods. See Tertullian’s Apol. and his first book Ad Nationes, and Arnobius, lib. 2.⁠—<span class="sc">Davis</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-256"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-256"><sup>256</sup></a> In some copies Circe, Pasiphae, and Æa are mentioned together; but Æa is rejected by the most judicious editors.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-257"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-257"><sup>257</sup></a> They were three, and are said to have averted a plague by offering themselves a sacrifice.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-258"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-258"><sup>258</sup></a> So called from the Greek word <span class="greek">θαυμάζω</span>, to wonder.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-259"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-259"><sup>259</sup></a> She was first called Geres, from <i>gero</i>, to bear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-260"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-260"><sup>260</sup></a> The word is <i>precatione</i>, which means the books or forms of prayers used by the augurs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-261"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-261"><sup>261</sup></a> Cotta’s intent here, as well as in other places, is to show how unphilosophical their civil theology was, and with what confusions it was embarrassed; which design of the Academic the reader should carefully keep in view, or he will lose the chain of argument.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-262"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-262"><sup>262</sup></a> Anactes, <span class="greek">Ἄνακτες</span>, was a general name for all kings, as we find in the oldest Greek writers, and particularly in Homer.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-263"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-263"><sup>263</sup></a> The common reading is Aleo; but we follow Lambinus and Davis, who had the authority of the best manuscript copies.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-264"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-264"><sup>264</sup></a> Some prefer Phthas to Opas (see Dr. Davis’s edition); but Opas is the generally received reading.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-265"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-265"><sup>265</sup></a> The Lipari Isles.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-266"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-266"><sup>266</sup></a> A town in Arcadia.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-267"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-267"><sup>267</sup></a> In Arcadia.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-268"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-268"><sup>268</sup></a> A northern people.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-269"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-269"><sup>269</sup></a> So called from the Greek word <span class="greek">νόμος</span>, <i>lex</i>, a law.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-270"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-270"><sup>270</sup></a> He is called <span class="greek">Ὦπις</span> in some old Greek fragments, and <span class="greek">Οὖπις</span> by Callimachus in his hymn on Diana.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-271"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-271"><sup>271</sup></a> <span class="greek">Σαβάζίος</span>, Sabazius, is one of the names used for Bacchus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-272"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-272"><sup>272</sup></a> Here is a wide chasm in the original. What is lost probably may have contained great part of Cotta’s arguments against the providence of the Stoics.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-273"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-273"><sup>273</sup></a> Here is one expression in the quotation from Cæcilius that is not commonly met with, which is <i>præstigias præstrinxit;</i> Lambinus gives <i>præstinxit</i>, for the sake, I suppose, of playing on words, because it might then be translated, “He has deluded my delusions, or stratagems;” but <i>præstrinxit</i> is certainly the right reading.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-274"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-274"><sup>274</sup></a> The ancient Romans had a judicial as well as a military prætor; and he sat, with inferior judges attending him, like one of our chief-justices. <i>Sessum it prætor</i>, which I doubt not is the right reading, Lambinus restored from an old copy. The common reading was <i>sessum ite precor</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-275"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-275"><sup>275</sup></a> Picenum was a region of Italy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-276"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-276"><sup>276</sup></a> The <i>sex primi</i> were general receivers of all taxes and tributes; and they were obliged to make good, out of their own fortunes, whatever deficiencies were in the public treasury.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-277"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-277"><sup>277</sup></a> The Lætorian Law was a security for those under age against extortioners, etc. By this law all debts contracted under twenty-five years of age were void.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-278"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-278"><sup>278</sup></a> This is from Ennius⁠—</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>Utinam ne in nemore Pelio securibus</p>
					<p>Cæsa cecidisset abiegna ad terram trabes.</p>
				</div>
				<p>Translated from the beginning of the Medea of Euripides⁠—</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>
						<span class="greek">Μήδ’ ἐν νάπαισι Πηλίον πεσεῖν ποτε</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="greek">τμηθεῖσα πεύκη.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-279"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-279"><sup>279</sup></a> Q. Fabius Maximus, surnamed Cunctator.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-280"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-280"><sup>280</sup></a> Diogenes Laertius says he was pounded to death in a stone mortar by command of Nicocreon, tyrant of Cyprus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-281"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-281"><sup>281</sup></a> Elea, a city of Lucania, in Italy. The manner in which Zeno was put to death is, according to Diogenes Laertius, uncertain.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-282"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-282"><sup>282</sup></a> This great and good man was accused of destroying the divinity of the Gods of his country. He was condemned, and died by drinking a glass of poison.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-283"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-283"><sup>283</sup></a> Tyrant of Sicily.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-284"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-284"><sup>284</sup></a> The common reading is, <i>in tympanidis rogum inlatus est</i>. This passage has been the occasion of as many different opinions concerning both the reading and the sense as any passage in the whole treatise. <i>Tympanum</i> is used for a timbrel or drum, <i>tympanidia</i> a diminutive of it. Lambinus says <i>tympana</i> “were sticks with which the tyrant used to beat the condemned.” P. Victorius substitutes <i>tyrannidis</i> for <i>tympanidis</i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-285"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-285"><sup>285</sup></a> The original is <i>de amissa salute;</i> which means the sentence of banishment among the Romans, in which was contained the loss of goods and estate, and the privileges of a Roman; and in this sense L’Abbé d’Olivet translates it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-286"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-286"><sup>286</sup></a> The forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid is unanimously ascribed to him by the ancients. Dr. Wotton, in his Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning, says, “It is indeed a very noble proposition, the foundation of trigonometry, of universal and various use in those curious speculations about incommensurable numbers.”</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-287"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-287"><sup>287</sup></a> These votive tables, or pictures, were hung up in the temples.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-288"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-288"><sup>288</sup></a> This passage is a fragment from a tragedy of Attius.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-289"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-289"><sup>289</sup></a> Hipponax was a poet at Ephesus, and so deformed that Bupalus drew a picture of him to provoke laughter; for which Hipponax is said to have written such keen iambics on the painter that he hanged himself.</p>
				<p>Lycambes had promised Archilochus the poet to marry his daughter to him, but afterward retracted his promise, and refused her; upon which Archilochus is said to have published a satire in iambic verse that provoked him to hang himself.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-290"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-290"><sup>290</sup></a> Cicero refers here to an oracle approving of his laws, and promising Sparta prosperity as long as they were obeyed, which Lycurgus procured from Delphi.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-291"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-291"><sup>291</sup></a> <i>Pro aris et focis</i> is a proverbial expression. The Romans, when they would say their all was at stake, could not express it stronger than by saying they contended <i>pro aris et focis</i>, for religion and their firesides, or, as we express it, for religion and property.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="FN">
				<p><a id="FN-292"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNA-292"><sup>292</sup></a> Cicero, who was an Academic, gives his opinion according to the manner of the Academics, who looked upon probability, and a resemblance of truth, as the utmost they could arrive at.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
