<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
      <section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
        <h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
        <ol>
          <li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Some read <i xml:lang="la">scientiam</i> and some <i xml:lang="la">inscientiam;</i> the latter of which is preferred by some of the best editors and commentators. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
		  </li>
          <li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>For a short account of these ancient Greek philosophers, see the sketch prefixed to the Academics (<i>Classical Library</i>). <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Cicero wrote his philosophical works in the last three years of his life. When he wrote this piece, he was in the sixty-third year of his age, in the year of Rome 709. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
		  </li>
          <li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>The Academic. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Diodorus and Posidonius were Stoics; Philo and Antiochus were Academics; but the latter afterward inclined to the doctrine of the Stoics. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Julius Cæsar. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Cicero was one of the College of Augurs. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>The Latinæ Feriæ was originally a festival of the Latins, altered by Tarquinius Superbus into a Roman one. It was held in the Alban Mount, in honor of Jupiter Latiaris. This holiday lasted six days: it was not held at any fixed time; but the consul was never allowed to take the field till he had held them.⁠—<i xml:lang="la">Vide</i> Smith, Dict. Gr. and Rom. Ant., <abbr>p.</abbr> 414. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
			<p><i xml:lang="la">Exhedra</i>, the word used by Cicero, means a study, or place where disputes were held. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>M. Piso was a Peripatetic. The four great sects were the Stoics, the Peripatetics, the Academics, and the Epicureans. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>It was a prevailing tenet of the Academics that there is no certain knowledge. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>The five forms of Plato are these: <i xml:lang="grc">οὐσία, ταὐτὸν, ἕτερον, στάσις, κίνησις.</i> <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>The four natures here to be understood are the four elements⁠—fire, water, air, and earth; which are mentioned as the four principles of Empedocles by Diogenes Laertius. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>These five moving stars are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and Venus. Their revolutions are considered in the next book. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Or, Generation of the Gods. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The <i xml:lang="grc">πρόληψις</i> of Epicurus, before mentioned, is what he here means. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="grc">Στερέμνια</i> is the word which Epicurus used to distinguish between those objects which are perceptible to sense, and those which are imperceptible; as the essence of the Divine Being, and the various operations of the divine power. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Zeno here mentioned is not the same that Cotta spoke of before. This was the founder of the Stoics. The other was an Epicurean philosopher whom he had heard at Athens. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>That is, there would be the same uncertainty in heaven as is among the Academics. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Those nations which were neither Greek nor Roman. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Sigilla numerantes</i> is the common reading; but P. Manucius proposes <i xml:lang="la">venerantes</i>, which I choose as the better of the two, and in which sense I have translated it. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Fundamental doctrines. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>That is, the zodiac. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The moon, as well as the sun, is indeed in the zodiac, but she does not measure the same course in a month. She moves in another line of the zodiac nearer the earth. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>According to the doctrines of Epicurus, none of these bodies themselves are clearly seen, but <i xml:lang="la">simulacra ex corporibus effluentia</i>. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Epicurus taught his disciples in a garden. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>By the word <i xml:lang="la">Deus</i>, as often used by our author, we are to understand all the Gods in that theology then treated of, and not a single personal Deity. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The best commentators on this passage agree that Cicero does not mean that Aristotle affirmed that there was no such person as Orpheus, but that there was no such poet, and that the verse called Orphic was said to be the invention of another. The passage of Aristotle to which Cicero here alludes has, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Davis observes, been long lost. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
            </li>
          <li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A just proportion between the different sorts of beings. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
            </li>
          <li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Some give <i xml:lang="la">quos non pudeat earum Epicuri vocum;</i> but the best copies have not <i xml:lang="la">non;</i> nor would it be consistent with Cotta to say <i xml:lang="la">quos non pudeat</i>, for he throughout represents Velleius as a perfect Epicurean in every article. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>His country was Abdera, the natives of which were remarkable for their stupidity. <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This passage will not admit of a translation answerable to the sense of the original. Cicero says the word <i xml:lang="la">amicitia</i> (friendship) is derived from <i xml:lang="la">amor</i> (love or affection). <a href="book-1.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>This manner of speaking of Jupiter frequently occurs in Homer,</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>⸺⁠<i xml:lang="grc">πατὴρ ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε,</i></p>
				</div>
	    <p>and has been used by Virgil and other poets since Ennius. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Perses, or Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, was taken by Cnæus Octavius, the prætor, and brought as prisoner to Paullus Æmilius, 167 <span class="sc">b.c.</span> <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>An exemption from serving in the wars, and from paying public taxes. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Mopsus. There were two soothsayers of this name: the first was one of the Lapithæ, son of Ampycus and Chloris, called also the son of Apollo and Hienantis; the other a son of Apollo and Manto, who is said to have founded Mallus, in Asia Minor, where his oracle existed as late as the time of Strabo. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Tiresias was the great Theban prophet at the time of the war of the Seven against Thebes. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Amphiaraus was King of Argos (he had been one of the Argonauts also). He was killed after the war of the Seven against Thebes, which he was compelled to join in by the treachery of his wife Eriphyle, by the earth opening and swallowing him up as he was fleeing from Periclymenus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Calchas was the prophet of the Grecian army at the siege of Troy. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Helenus was a son of Priam and Hecuba. He is represented as a prophet in the Philoctetes of Sophocles. And in the Æneid he is also represented as king of part of Epirus, and as predicting to Æneas the dangers and fortunes which awaited him. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>This short passage would be very obscure to the reader without an explanation from another of Cicero’s treatises. The expression here, <i xml:lang="la">ad investigandum suem regiones vineæ terminavit</i>, which is a metaphor too bold, if it was not a sort of augural language, seems to me to have been the effect of carelessness in our great author; for Navius did not divide the regions, as he calls them, of the vine to find his sow, but to find a grape. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>The Peremnia were a sort of auspices performed just before the passing a river. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Acumina were a military auspices, and were partly performed on the point of a spear, from which they were called Acumina. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Those were called <i xml:lang="la">testamenta in procinctu</i>, which were made by soldiers just before an engagement, in the presence of men called as witnesses. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This especially refers to the Decii, one of whom devoted himself for his country in the war with the Latins, 340 <span class="sc">b.c.</span>, and his son imitated the action in the war with the Samnites, 295 <span class="sc">b.c.</span> Cicero (Tusc. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 37) says that his son did the same thing in the war with Pyrrhus at the battle of Asculum, though in other places (De Off. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 4) he speaks of only two Decii as having signalized themselves in this manner. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Rogator, who collected the votes, and pronounced who was the person chosen. There were two sorts of Rogators; one was the officer here mentioned, and the other was the Rogator, or speaker of the whole assembly. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Which was Sardinia, as appears from one of Cicero’s epistles to his brother Quintus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Their sacred books of ceremonies. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The war between Octavius and Cinna, the consuls. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This, in the original, is a fragment of an old Latin verse,</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">⸺⁠Terram fumare calentem.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
            <p> <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Latin word is <i xml:lang="la">principatus</i>, which exactly corresponds with the Greek word here used by Cicero; by which is to be understood the superior, the most prevailing excellence in every kind and species of things through the universe. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The passage of Aristotle to which Cicero here refers is lost. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>He means the Epicureans. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Here the Stoic speaks too plain to be misunderstood. His world, his <i xml:lang="la">mundus</i>, is the universe, and that universe is his great Deity, <i xml:lang="la">in quo sit totius naturæ principatus</i>, in which the superior excellence of universal nature consists. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Athens, the seat of learning and politeness, of which Balbus will not allow Epicurus to be worthy. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This is Pythagoras’s doctrine, as appears in Diogenes Laertius. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>He here alludes to mathematical and geometrical instruments. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Balbus here speaks of the fixed stars, and of the motions of the orbs of the planets. He here alludes, says M. Bonhier, to the different and diurnal motions of these stars; one sort from east to west, the other from one tropic to the other: and this is the construction which our learned and great geometrician and astronomer, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Halley, made of this passage. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This mensuration of the year into three hundred and sixty-five days and near six hours (by the odd hours and minutes of which, in every fifth year, the <i xml:lang="la">dies intercalaris</i>, or leap-year, is made) could not but be known, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Halley states, by Hipparchus, as appears from the remains of that great astronomer of the ancients. We are inclined to think that Julius Cæsar had divided the year, according to what we call the Julian year, before Cicero wrote this book; for we see, in the beginning of it, how pathetically he speaks of Cæsar’s usurpation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The words of Censorinus, on this occasion, are to the same effect. The opinions of philosophers concerning this great year are very different; but the institution of it is ascribed to Democritus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The zodiac. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Though Mars is said to hold his orbit in the zodiac with the rest, and to finish his revolution through the same orbit (that is, the zodiac) with the other two, yet Balbus means in a different line of the zodiac. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>According to late observations, it never goes but a sign and a half from the sun. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Davis says, are “aërial fires;” concerning which he refers to the second book of Pliny. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>In the Eunuch of Terence. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Bacchus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The son of Ceres. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The books of Ceremonies. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This Libera is taken for Proserpine, who, with her brother Liber, was consecrated by the Romans; all which are parts of nature in prosopopœias. Cicero, therefore, makes Balbus distinguish between the person Liber, or Bacchus, and the Liber which is a part of nature in prosopopœia. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These allegorical fables are largely related by Hesiod in his Theogony.</p>
				<p>Horace says exactly the same thing:</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>Hâc arte Pollux et vagus Hercules</p>
					<p>Enisus arces attigit igneas:</p>
					<p class="£2">Quos inter Augustus recumbens</p>
					<p class="£4">Purpureo bibit ore nectar.</p>
					<p>Hâc te merentem, Bacche pater, tuæ</p>
					<p>Vexere tigres indocili jugum</p>
					<p class="£2">Collo ferentes: hâc Quirinus</p>
					<p class="£4">Martis equis Acheronta fugit.⁠—Hor. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 3. 9.</p>
				</div>
	    <p> <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Cicero means by <i xml:lang="la">conversis casibus</i>, varying the cases from the common rule of declension; that is, by departing from the true grammatical rules of speech; for if we would keep to it, we should decline the word <i xml:lang="la">Jupiter</i>, <i xml:lang="la">Jupiteris</i> in the second case, <abbr>etc.</abbr><a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Pater divûmque hominumque.</i><a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The common reading is, <i xml:lang="la">planiusque alio loco idem;</i> which, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Davis observes, is absurd; therefore, in his note, he prefers <i xml:lang="la">planius quam alia loco idem</i>, from two copies, in which sense I have translated it.<a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>From the verb <i xml:lang="la">gero</i>, to bear.<a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>That is, “mother earth.” <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Janus is said to be the first who erected temples in Italy, and instituted religious rites, and from whom the first month in the Roman calendar is derived. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Stellæ vagantes.</i> <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Noctu quasi diem efficeret.</i> Ben Jonson says the same thing:</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>Thou that mak’st a day of night,</p>
					<p>Goddess excellently bright.⁠—<i>Ode to the Moon.</i></p>
				</div>
	    <p><a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Olympias was the mother of Alexander. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Venus is here said to be one of the names of Diana, because <i xml:lang="la">ad res omnes veniret;</i> but she is not supposed to be the same as the mother of Cupid. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Here is a mistake, as Fulvius Ursinus observes; for the discourse seems to be continued in one day, as appears from the beginning of this book. This may be an inadvertency of Cicero. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The senate of Athens was so called from the words <i xml:lang="grc">Ἄρειος Πάγος</i>, the Village, some say the Hill, of Mars. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Epicurus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Stoics. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>By <i xml:lang="la">nulla cohærendi natura</i>⁠—if it is the right, as it is the common reading⁠—Cicero must mean the same as by <i xml:lang="la">nulla crescendi natura</i>, or <i xml:lang="la">coalescendi</i>, either of which Lambinus proposes; for, as the same learned critic well observes, is there not a cohesion of parts in a clod, or in a piece of stone? Our learned Walker proposes <i xml:lang="la">sola cohærendi natura</i>, which mends the sense very much; and I wish he had the authority of any copy for it. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Nasica Scipio, the censor, is said to have been the first who made a water-clock in Rome. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Epicureans. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>An old Latin poet, commended by Quintilian for the gravity of his sense and his loftiness of style. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The shepherd is here supposed to take the stem or beak of the ship for the mouth, from which the roaring voices of the sailors came. <i xml:lang="la">Rostrum</i> is here a lucky word to put in the mouth of one who never saw a ship before, as it is used for the beak of a bird, the snout of a beast or fish, and for the stem of a ship. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Epicureans. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Greek, <i xml:lang="grc">ἀὴρ</i>; Latin, <i xml:lang="la">aer</i>. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The treatise of Aristotle, from whence this is taken, is lost. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>To the universe the Stoics certainly annexed the idea of a limited space, otherwise they could not have talked of a middle; for there can be no middle but of a limited space: infinite space can have no middle, there being infinite extension from every part. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These two contrary reversions are from the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. They are the extreme bounds of the sun’s course. The reader must observe that the astronomical parts of this book are introduced by the Stoic as proofs of design and reason in the universe; and, notwithstanding the errors in his planetary system, his intent is well answered, because all he means is that the regular motions of the heavenly bodies, and their dependencies, are demonstrations of a divine mind. The inference proposed to be drawn from his astronomical observations is as just as if his system was in every part unexceptionably right: the same may be said of his anatomical observations. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>In the zodiac. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Ibid. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These verses of Cicero are a translation from a Greek poem of Aratus, called the Phænomena. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The fixed stars. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The arctic and antarctic poles. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The two Arctoi are northern constellations. Cynosura is what we call the Lesser Bear; Helice, the Greater Bear; in Latin, <i xml:lang="la">Ursa Minor</i> and <i xml:lang="la">Ursa Major</i>. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These stars in the Greater Bear are vulgarly called the “Seven Stars,” or the “Northern Wain;” by the Latins, “Septentriones.” <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Lesser Bear. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Greater Bear. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Exactly agreeable to this and the following description of the Dragon is the same northern constellation described in the map by Flamsteed in his Atlas Cœlestis; and all the figures here described by Aratus nearly agree with the maps of the same constellations in the Atlas Cœlestis, though they are not all placed precisely alike. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The tail of the Greater Bear. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>That is, in Macedon, where Aratus lived. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The true interpretation of this passage is as follows: Here in Macedon, says Aratus, the head of the Dragon does not entirely immerge itself in the ocean, but only touches the superficies of it. By <i xml:lang="la">ortus</i> and <i xml:lang="la">obitus</i> I doubt not but Cicero meant, agreeable to Aratus, those parts which arise to view, and those which are removed from sight. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These are two northern constellations. Engonasis, in some catalogues called Hercules, because he is figured kneeling <i xml:lang="grc">ἐν γόνασιν</i> (on his knees). <i xml:lang="grc">Ἐνγόνασιν καλέουσ’</i>, as Aratus says, they call Engonasis. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The crown is placed under the feet of Hercules in the Atlas Cœlestis; but Ophiuchus (<i xml:lang="grc">Ὀφιοῦχος</i>), the Snake-holder, is placed in the map by Flamsteed as described here by Aratus; and their heads almost meet. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Scorpion. Ophiuchus, though a northern constellation, is not far from that part of the zodiac where the Scorpion is, which is one of the six southern signs. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Wain of seven stars. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Wain-driver. This northern constellation is, in our present maps, figured with a club in his right hand behind the Greater Bear. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>In some modern maps Arcturus, a star of the first magnitude, is placed in the belt that is round the waist of Boötes. Cicero says <i xml:lang="la">subter præcordia</i>, which is about the waist; and Aratus says <i xml:lang="grc">ὑπὸ ζώνῃ</i>, under the belt. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Sub caput Arcti</i>, under the head of the Greater Bear. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Crab is, by the ancients and moderns, placed in the zodiac, as here, between the Twins and the Lion; and they are all three northern signs. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Twins are placed in the zodiac with the side of one to the northern hemisphere, and the side of the other to the southern hemisphere. Auriga, the Charioteer, is placed in the northern hemisphere near the zodiac, by the Twins; and at the head of the Charioteer is Helice, the Greater Bear, placed; and the Goat is a bright star of the first magnitude placed on the left shoulder of this northern constellation, and called <i xml:lang="la">Capra</i>, the Goat. <i xml:lang="la">Hœdi</i>, the Kids, are two more stars of the same constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A constellation; one of the northern signs in the zodiac, in which the Hyades are placed. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>One of the feet of Cepheus, a northern constellation, is under the tail of the Lesser Bear. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Grotius, and after him <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Davis, and other learned men, read <i xml:lang="la">Cassiepea</i>, after the Greek <i xml:lang="grc">Κασσίεπεια</i>, and reject the common reading, <i xml:lang="la">Cassiopea</i>. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These northern constellations here mentioned have been always placed together as one family with Cepheus and Perseus, as they are in our modern maps. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
            </li>
          <li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This alludes to the fable of Perseus and Andromeda. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Pegasus, who is one of Perseus and Andromeda’s family. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>That is, with wings. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Aries</i>, the Ram, is the first northern sign in the zodiac; <i xml:lang="la">Pisces</i>, the Fishes, the last southern sign; therefore they must be near one another, as they are in a circle or belt. In Flamsteed’s Atlas Cœlestis one of the Fishes is near the head of the Ram, and the other near the Urn of Aquarius. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These are called Virgiliæ by Cicero; by Aratus, the Pleiades, <i xml:lang="grc">Πληϊάδες</i>; and they are placed at the neck of the Bull; and one of Perseus’s feet touches the Bull in the Atlas Cœlestis. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This northern constellation is called Fides by Cicero; but it must be the same with Lyra; because Lyra is placed in our maps as Fides is here. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This is called Ales Avis by Cicero; and I doubt not but the northern constellation Cygnus is here to be understood, for the description and place of the Swan in the Atlas Cœlestis are the same which Ales Avis has here. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Pegasus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Water-bearer, one of the six southern signs in the zodiac: he is described in our maps pouring water out of an urn, and leaning with one hand on the tail of Capricorn, another southern sign. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>When the sun is in Capricorn, the days are at the shortest; and when in Cancer, at the longest. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>One of the six southern signs. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Sagittarius, another southern sign. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A northern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A northern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This is Canis Major, a southern constellation. Orion and the Dog are named together by Hesiod, who flourished many hundred years before Cicero or Aratus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation, placed as here in the Atlas Cœlestis. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation, so called from the ship Argo, in which Jason and the rest of the Argonauts sailed on their expedition to Colchos. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Ram is the first of the northern signs in the zodiac; and the last southern sign is the Fishes; which two signs, meeting in the zodiac, cover the constellation called Argo. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The river Eridanus, a southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This is called the Scorpion in the original of Aratus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Serpent is not mentioned in Cicero’s translation; but it is in the original of Aratus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Goblet, or Cup, a southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A southern constellation. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Antecanis, a southern constellation, is the Little Dog, and called <i xml:lang="la">Antecanis</i> in Latin, and <i xml:lang="grc">Προκύων</i> in Greek, because he rises before the other Dog. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Pansætius, a Stoic philosopher. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Mercury and Venus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The proboscis of the elephant is frequently called a hand, because it is as useful to him as one. “They breathe, drink, and smell, with what may not be improperly called a hand,” says Pliny, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. c. 10.⁠—<span class="sc">Davis</span>. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The passage of Aristotle’s works to which Cicero here alludes is entirely lost; but Plutarch gives a similar account. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Balbus does not tell us the remedy which the panther makes use of; but Pliny is not quite so delicate: he says, <i xml:lang="la">excrementis hominis sibi medetur</i>. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Aristotle says they purge themselves with this herb after they fawn. Pliny says both before and after. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The cuttle-fish has a bag at its neck, the black blood of which the Romans used for ink. It was called <i xml:lang="la">atramentum</i>. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Euphrates is said to carry into Mesopotamia a large quantity of citrons, with which it covers the fields. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Q. Curtius, and some other authors, say the Ganges is the largest river in India; but Ammianus Marcellinus concurs with Cicero in calling the river Indus the largest of all rivers. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These Etesian winds return periodically once a year, and blow at certain seasons, and for a certain time. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Some read <i xml:lang="la">mollitur</i>, and some <i xml:lang="la">molitur;</i> the latter of which P. Manucius justly prefers, from the verb <i xml:lang="la">molo</i>, <i xml:lang="la">molis;</i> from whence, says he, <i xml:lang="la">molares dentes</i>, the grinders. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The weasand, or windpipe. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The epiglottis, which is a cartilaginous flap in the shape of a tongue, and therefore called so. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Cicero is here giving the opinion of the ancients concerning the passage of the chyle till it is converted to blood. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>What Cicero here calls the ventricles of the heart are likewise called auricles, of which there is the right and left. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Stoics and Peripatetics said that the nerves, veins, and arteries come directly from the heart. According to the anatomy of the moderns, they come from the brain. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The author means all musical instruments, whether string or wind instruments, which are hollow and tortuous. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Latin version of Cicero is a translation from the Greek of Aratus. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Chrysippus’s meaning is, that the swine is so inactive and slothful a beast that life seems to be of no use to it but to keep it from putrefaction, as salt keeps dead flesh. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Ales</i>, in the general signification, is any large bird; and <i xml:lang="la">oscinis</i> is any singing bird. But they here mean those birds which are used in augury: <i xml:lang="la">alites</i> are the birds whose flight was observed by the augurs, and <i xml:lang="la">oscines</i> the birds from whose voices they augured. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>As the Academics doubted everything, it was indifferent to them which side of a question they took. <a href="book-2.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The keepers and interpreters of the Sibylline oracles were the Quindecimviri. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The popular name of Jupiter in Rome, being looked upon as defender of the Capitol (in which he was placed), and stayer of the State. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Some passages of the original are here wanting. Cotta continues speaking against the doctrine of the Stoics. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The word <i xml:lang="la">sortes</i> is often used for the answers of the oracles, or, rather, for the rolls in which the answers were written. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Three of this eminent family sacrificed themselves for their country; the father in the Latin war, the son in the Tuscan war, and the grandson in the war with Pyrrhus. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Straits of Gibraltar. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The common reading is, <i xml:lang="la">ex quo anima dicitur;</i> but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Davis and M. Bouhier prefer <i xml:lang="la">animal</i>, though they keep <i xml:lang="la">anima</i> in the text, because our author says elsewhere, <i xml:lang="la">animum ex anima dictum</i>, Tusc. I. 1. Cicero is not here to be accused of contradictions, for we are to consider that he speaks in the characters of other persons; but there appears to be nothing in these two passages irreconcilable, and probably <i xml:lang="la">anima</i> is the right word here. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>He is said to have led a colony from Greece into Caria, in Asia, and to have built a town, and called it after his own name, for which his countrymen paid him divine honors after his death. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Our great author is under a mistake here. Homer does not say he met Hercules himself, but his <i xml:lang="grc">Εἴδωλον</i>, his “visionary likeness;” and adds that he himself</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p class="£6" style="margin-left: 15ex">
						<i xml:lang="grc">μετ’ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="grc">τέρπεται ἐν θαλίῃς, καὶ ἔχει καλλίσφυρου Ἥβην,</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="grc">παῖδα Διὸς μεγάλοιο καὶ Ἥρης χρυσοπεδίλου.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>which Pope translates⁠—</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>A shadowy form, for high in heaven’s abodes</p>
					<p>Himself resides, a God among the Gods;</p>
					<p>There, in the bright assemblies of the skies,</p>
					<p>He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.</p>
				</div>
                                <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
          </li>
          <li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>They are said to have been the first workers in iron. They were called Idæi, because they inhabited about Mount Ida in Crete, and Dactyli, from <i xml:lang="grc">δάκτυλοι</i> (the fingers), their number being five. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>From whom, some say, the city of that name was called. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Capedunculæ seem to have been bowls or cups, with handles on each side, set apart for the use of the altar.⁠—<span class="sc">Davis</span>. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>See Cicero de Divinatione, and Ovid. Fast. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>In the consulship of Piso and Gabinius sacrifices to Serapis and Isis were prohibited in Rome; but the Roman people afterward placed them again in the number of their gods. See Tertullian’s Apol. and his first book Ad Nationes, and Arnobius, <abbr>lib.</abbr> 2.⁠—<span class="sc">Davis</span>. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>In some copies Circe, Pasiphae, and Æa are mentioned together; but Æa is rejected by the most judicious editors. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>They were three, and are said to have averted a plague by offering themselves a sacrifice. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>So called from the Greek word <i xml:lang="grc">θαυμάζω</i>, to wonder. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>She was first called Geres, from <i xml:lang="la">gero</i>, to bear. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The word is <i xml:lang="la">precatione</i>, which means the books or forms of prayers used by the augurs. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Cotta’s intent here, as well as in other places, is to show how unphilosophical their civil theology was, and with what confusions it was embarrassed; which design of the Academic the reader should carefully keep in view, or he will lose the chain of argument. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Anactes, <i xml:lang="grc">Ἄνακτες</i>, was a general name for all kings, as we find in the oldest Greek writers, and particularly in Homer. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The common reading is Aleo; but we follow Lambinus and Davis, who had the authority of the best manuscript copies. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Some prefer Phthas to Opas (see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Davis’s edition); but Opas is the generally received reading. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Lipari Isles. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A town in Arcadia. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>In Arcadia. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>A northern people. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>So called from the Greek word <i xml:lang="grc">νόμος</i>, <i xml:lang="la">lex</i>, a law. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>He is called <i xml:lang="grc">Ὦπις</i> in some old Greek fragments, and <i xml:lang="grc">>Οὖπις</i> by Callimachus in his hymn on Diana. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="grc">Σαβάζίος</i>, Sabazius, is one of the names used for Bacchus. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Here is a wide chasm in the original. What is lost probably may have contained great part of Cotta’s arguments against the providence of the Stoics. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Here is one expression in the quotation from Cæcilius that is not commonly met with, which is <i xml:lang="la">præstigias præstrinxit;</i> Lambinus gives <i xml:lang="la">præstinxit</i>, for the sake, I suppose, of playing on words, because it might then be translated, “He has deluded my delusions, or stratagems;” but <i xml:lang="la">præstrinxit</i> is certainly the right reading. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The ancient Romans had a judicial as well as a military prætor; and he sat, with inferior judges attending him, like one of our chief-justices. <i xml:lang="la">Sessum it prætor</i>, which I doubt not is the right reading, Lambinus restored from an old copy. The common reading was <i xml:lang="la">sessum ite precor</i>. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Picenum was a region of Italy. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The <i xml:lang="la">sex primi</i> were general receivers of all taxes and tributes; and they were obliged to make good, out of their own fortunes, whatever deficiencies were in the public treasury. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The Lætorian Law was a security for those under age against extortioners, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> By this law all debts contracted under twenty-five years of age were void. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This is from Ennius⁠—</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>Utinam ne in nemore Pelio securibus</p>
					<p>Cæsa cecidisset abiegna ad terram trabes.</p>
				</div>
				<p>Translated from the beginning of the Medea of Euripides⁠—</p>
				<div class="poem">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="grc">Μήδ’ ἐν νάπαισι Πηλίον πεσεῖν ποτε</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="grc">τμηθεῖσα πεύκη.</i>
					<a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</div>
          </li>
          <li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Q. Fabius Maximus, surnamed Cunctator. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Diogenes Laertius says he was pounded to death in a stone mortar by command of Nicocreon, tyrant of Cyprus. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Elea, a city of Lucania, in Italy. The manner in which Zeno was put to death is, according to Diogenes Laertius, uncertain. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This great and good man was accused of destroying the divinity of the Gods of his country. He was condemned, and died by drinking a glass of poison. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Tyrant of Sicily. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The common reading is, <i xml:lang="la">in tympanidis rogum inlatus est</i>. This passage has been the occasion of as many different opinions concerning both the reading and the sense as any passage in the whole treatise. <i xml:lang="la">Tympanum</i> is used for a timbrel or drum, <i xml:lang="la">tympanidia</i> a diminutive of it. Lambinus says <i xml:lang="la">tympana</i> “were sticks with which the tyrant used to beat the condemned.” P. Victorius substitutes <i xml:lang="la">tyrannidis</i> for <i xml:lang="la">tympanidis</i>. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The original is <i xml:lang="la">de amissa salute;</i> which means the sentence of banishment among the Romans, in which was contained the loss of goods and estate, and the privileges of a Roman; and in this sense L’Abbé d’Olivet translates it. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>The forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid is unanimously ascribed to him by the ancients. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Wotton, in his Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning, says, “It is indeed a very noble proposition, the foundation of trigonometry, of universal and various use in those curious speculations about incommensurable numbers.” <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>These votive tables, or pictures, were hung up in the temples. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>This passage is a fragment from a tragedy of Attius. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Hipponax was a poet at Ephesus, and so deformed that Bupalus drew a picture of him to provoke laughter; for which Hipponax is said to have written such keen iambics on the painter that he hanged himself.</p>
	    <p>Lycambes had promised Archilochus the poet to marry his daughter to him, but afterward retracted his promise, and refused her; upon which Archilochus is said to have published a satire in iambic verse that provoked him to hang himself. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Cicero refers here to an oracle approving of his laws, and promising Sparta prosperity as long as they were obeyed, which Lycurgus procured from Delphi. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p><i xml:lang="la">Pro aris et focis</i> is a proverbial expression. The Romans, when they would say their all was at stake, could not express it stronger than by saying they contended <i xml:lang="la">pro aris et focis</i>, for religion and their firesides, or, as we express it, for religion and property. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
          <li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
	    <p>Cicero, who was an Academic, gives his opinion according to the manner of the Academics, who looked upon probability, and a resemblance of truth, as the utmost they could arrive at. <a href="book-3.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
          </li>
            </ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
